<start>We understand you made a foreign policy related call shortly?<stop><start>Yes, I just talked to President Kim about the No Gun Ri incident and personally expressed my regret to him. And I thanked him for the work that we had done together in developing our mutual statement. We also set up this scholarship fund and did some other things that we hope will be a genuine gesture of our regret. It was a very you know, I had a good talk with him.<stop><start>Any particular reason why you used the word "regret" instead of "apology" in your statement?<stop><start>I think the findings were I think he knows that "regret" and "apology" both mean the same thing, in terms of being profoundly sorry for what happened. But I believe that the people who looked into it could not conclude that there was a deliberate act, decided at a high enough level in the military hierarchy, to acknowledge that, in effect, the Government had participated in something that was terrible. So I don't think there's any difference in the two words, on a human level, because we are profoundly sorry that it happened and sorry that any Americans were involved in it. But I think that in terms of the kind of responsibility the institution of the military that the facts were sufficiently unclear after all this time that the people who were reviewing it thought it was the appropriate language. And we worked it out with the Koreans and obviously shared whatever we could find with them. These people have been our friends for 50 years. We didn't have I told our guys to play it straight, that we didn't have an interest in trying to cover anything up or sugar coat anything we needed to try to get to the bottom of this. I think that we've done about the best we can do. And I hope that the people of Korea will accept our statement as genuine, and I hope it will bring some solace to the family members and the few people that still survived who were involved in it, who will never get over it. California Electricity Shortages<stop><start>Let me ask you another topical question. California is on the verge of blackouts. Is there anything you can do in your remaining time in office?<stop><start>Well, I'm working at it. We have done some things. Secretary Richardson has worked very hard to make sure that the wholesalers kept selling the power to the utilities. But essentially, what happened was before without any involvement from the Federal Government and before the previous administration in California, the deregulation was done in a way that made them vulnerable not to in essence, to very high prices, maybe prices that aren't justified by market conditions on occasion. They need to get all they can get from out of State generators and in State generators, because they've grown so much. And they still have a regulation of prices to the ultimate consumer. So we've got a situation here which it seems to me might have been predictable at the time the deregulation legislation was done. But I, frankly, until this happened, I didn't know what the nature of the California deregulation law was. I didn't even know when it had been done, until this whole thing arose. So we're dealing with the situation the best we can. But I also think we need to talk to some of the producers, see whether more power can be brought on line at economical rates more quickly. I actually talked to one of them myself just in the last 2 or 3 days. So I'm trying to get all of our options out there, and if there's anything else I can do, I will. I saw Governor Davis about a week ago, and I told him that. But I do believe that the Governor and the people of California know that, through the Energy Department, we've done everything we can so far. 2000 Presidential Election<stop><start>Let me turn you to the election very quickly. You seemed to surprise everybody when you said that the Republicans only that when they stopped the counting, that's the only way that George W. won. What point were you trying to make there?<stop><start>I was actually just having fun with Bill Daley in Chicago. We were home and his brother he had introduced his brother. I think Bill did a very fine job running the Vice President's campaign. I was just having a good time, trying to put them all in a good humor. I wasn't trying to be sarcastic or hateful or even make any kind of deliberate point. I was basically having fun with what I think are the undisputed facts. I don't think there's much dispute about the facts. They didn't finish the vote count. There's really no everybody knows that.<stop><start>Do you have any hard feelings about the election outcome and the way the Court, the conservative majority stepped in to stop the counting?<stop><start>Well, I don't have much to add to what I said. I think the Vice President said it all for us. We accept the principle of judicial review. It's a very important one. It has been since John Marshall wrote the opinion in Marbury v. Madison in the early 19th century. And it has helped us to have some finality in our law. But yes, I disagree with the decision, and I think most constitutional scholars do. I saw a quote in the paper the other day from a man who was a law professor in the Middle West I'm sorry, I don't remember his name but he identified himself as a conservative, pro life Republican. But he said, "I am a constitutional law professor, and I disagree with this decision." But the country has had, periodically thankfully not often, but periodically there's a handful of Supreme Court decisions that I think were unfortunate. But we nearly always straighten it out with time. And in the meanwhile, the election was very close. It was fought nearly to a draw, and the political forces in Florida, the legislature might have done the same thing, and it might have been upheld. I just hated to see the Court involved in this way when there was, you know, 6 days less to count the votes. But I didn't mean to make any big point. I didn't say anything that I and the Vice President and other Democrats had said tons of times. I was just having fun, trying to say something nice, to make people laugh about Bill Daley. It's pretty tough on him, you know, because he really did do a good job. I think they were about 10 points behind or something, and Bill took over, and he really did, I think, a very good job.<stop><start>Can I switch to the Middle East? Everything that's going on right now. Today they had some talks<stop><start>Let me just say one other you shouldn't read anything about that has nothing to do with we have tried to be very supportive of the President elect and his team and the transition. I haven't tried to politicize this. I was strictly having fun with my friends in Chicago and bucking up Bill Daley. That's all. Anyway, go ahead. Middle East Peace Process<stop><start>The Middle East, there were some talks in the Gaza today between Israelis and Palestinians. But Sharon has already said the Oslo deal is dead, basically. What are your thoughts about the next 8 days? Is there any hope for anything to happen or will you<stop><start>I think there is. It depends on what the agreement is and then how the Israeli electorate responds to it. General Sharon has, I think, never liked the Oslo agreement and has been very honest about it. But he did come to Wye River he participated fully. Then Prime Minister Netanyahu had been very critical of Oslo. But they negotiated that agreement at Wye River, and previously to that, I think he was in when they finalized the Hebron agreement. So you have to hope that this process keeps going. The reason we went let me just back up and say, the reason we went to Camp David in the first place is that it was obvious to everybody that just as the Hebron and then especially the Wye River agreement was absolutely essential to keep the peace process alive, because the previous understandings had come to the end of their rope and they had to stay on the process, it was obvious to me that we had come to the end of our capacity to stay in the peace process with just the Wye River agreement. It worked very well for a couple of years, but there had to be some continued movement. Because what happens is, when you reach a stall, then the people that really don't want this to happen, particularly rejectionist elements within the Palestinian community, they can have incidents then they provoke reactions then the borders get closed then the incomes of the Palestinians drop again, and you get in a downward spiral. So I was trying to head off just what we've been through these last 3 months. So I think that they will have to reach some sort of accommodation, unless they really want the thing to spin out of control. And I really don't believe either side wants that, so we'll just have to see. But you know, whatever happens will be the responsibility of the next administration and the winner of the Israeli election, whoever that may be.<stop><start>Do you think it's important for you to set out a list of, maybe, points that have been agreed to so far, so that they don't start from scratch again, that you don't lose what you've already gotten?<stop><start>Well, I think it was quite significant, actually, even though it came 6 days later than I wanted it to, that the Palestinians have now agreed in principle with the parameters. So at least that Israeli government and the Palestinian Authority have agreed this Israeli government, excuse me and the Palestinian Authority have agreed to the parameters. Both sides have some concerns and some questions which are, frankly, quite well known to either side. So I think we have narrowed the debate and moved it forward. Now obviously, unless there is an agreement, the United States Government is not bound by the position I took. Any incoming Israeli government would not be bound. For example, when I felt that I had to continue a number of President Bush's policies I didn't particularly disagree with them, either, by the way, in Somalia and one or two other places but I didn't really believe it was an option to reverse them, because our Government was committed. And I think it's very important that we except in the most extreme circumstances maintain some continuity in foreign policy and in our commitments to other countries. But President elect Bush is in no way, shape, or form bound by the positions I've taken on this Middle East agreement, unless there is some agreement.<stop><start>Do you think that'll happen?<stop><start>I just don't know. You know, it's a very difficult to predict situation. All the odds say no, but there are reasons why they are both working to get this done. In all my 8 years of service as President, I've never seen a situation quite like this, where the circumstances, including my short time in office, seemed unfavorable, but the determination of the main players seems strong, in fact, maybe even intensified. So we'll just have to see what happens. I'm trying to keep myself free of expectation one way or the other, and to do whatever I can to try to help end the violence and we had a good day today and just create the conditions in which, if they're willing, they can do as much as they can do. And we'll just have to see what happens. I don't think we can predict it.<stop><start>Do you think the incoming Bush people will be as interested in pursuing this as you have been?<stop><start>Well, I think they will be very interested in stability and peace in the Middle East. Their orientation has been a little more toward, you know, the Gulf, the oil producing states, honoring our historic commitments to Israel to maintain their qualitative military capacity. But to be fair, the previous Bush administration took a pretty strong line on expanded settlements after the Madrid talks started in the hope that they could help to create the conditions in which the Palestinians and the Israelis could move toward peace. So I think that there may be differences in approach and priorities that the President and the Vice President and Secretary Powell will have to work through. But my guess is that their general direction will be the same, because in the end, what happens is let's assume and I'm not saying this, because I don't believe this but listen, even if you had an administration that didn't really care about the Palestinian problem on its own merits and said, "Well, our real interests are in the geopolitics of the oilproducing states and the problems created by the lack of an agreement with Syria." And by the way, I'm fairly optimistic that there will be an agreement between Israel and Syria sometime in the not too distant future, and I don't think there would be much difference in the policy positions taken by Likud or a Labor government on Syria, or by my administration or the incoming administration. We worked this hard, I mean, for years. And I think if the late President Asad hadn't kind of felt he was not in the best of health and was not that they wanted to freeze things in place, and if he can secure his son's accession, we might well have been able to do a peace agreement when I met with him in Switzerland shortly before his death. So I expect that I don't think there will be much difference there. So even if it's not a priority for you because it looks like a morass that can't be solved in a small place with people that don't have a state, don't have nuclear arms, don't have an air force, don't have an army, inevitably what we always get back to is that the absence of an agreement with the Palestinians and the absence of a stable situation between Israel and the Palestinians infects the other countries and their capacity to relate to us over the long run. And particularly as these other countries have more and more young people who are more and more drawn to the sympathetic drawn with a sympathetic ear to the claims of the Palestinians, and they have more demonstrations in these other countries and more unrest in these other countries, I think that our concern for stability in our relations with the Saudis, with the Kuwaitis, with not letting Saddam Hussein develop weapons of mass destruction again, the whole range of concerns that any American administration would have to have leads you back down to the Israeli Palestinian conflict and trying to get to the end of the road there. I mean, I just think you do. I think that that's why I made the speech I did to the Israeli Policy Forum the other night. I waited until the very end, and until, essentially, I had put these parameters out before saying that, because I don't believe an American President should try to impose or create a peace between these two parties. The questions go too much to the heart of their respective sense of national identities, their cultural identity, their whole set of religious convictions. So all I said in these parameters and all I meant to say in the Israel Policy Forum speech is, "Look, I've been listening to these people for 8 years, and I've studied these issues as closely, I believe, as any American President ever has, down to the maps, the settlement locations, the maps of the city of Jerusalem, the whole thing. My best judgment is if there ever is going to be a comprehensive agreement, it will have to look something like this." And you know, that's not the only option. In other words, they could do what they did at Wye River. They could say, "Okay, here's the next chapter, and this is what we're going to do." But the real problem with the sort of sequencing of interim steps is that, at least so far, because of all the other very complex forces going on there, these steps have not brought sufficient stability to the relationship and to the climate within the Palestinian areas or within Israel that there can be a long term sort of set of nonpolitical measures that lead to progress which is exactly the reverse of the Irish situation. And you may have heard me say this before, but the difference is, in Ireland I may have said this in the Israel Policy Forum speech, I can't remember but my physical analogy is, some unsolved problems are like scabs on a wound. If you leave them alone, they'll heal. Some are like an abscessed tooth. If you leave it alone, it will get lots worse. In Ireland, because the underlying economic circumstances are dramatically improved and because there has been a dramatic increase in interpersonal contact which is positive, and because while there is a small terrorist group that is still trying to upset the Irish thing, it's much more contained, the absence of final resolution of the thorny political issues is unlikely to crater the situation. In the Middle East, the per capita income of most Palestinians is the same or lower than it was when we signed the agreement on the White House Lawn, because there are so many different groups that can paralyze the process with acts of terror or violence that close the borders, that stop everything, that wreck the economy, and that kind of burn the bridges of trust that get built up when things are going okay for a year or so. I think it's more like an abscessed tooth. So that's why I decided to make the speech I gave at the Israel Policy Forum. But they don't have to do that. They could reach another accommodation. They could say, "Okay, we can't do this whole thing, but we can't just rest on Oslo plus Wye River, so we have to do this," whatever this is. And they could do that. But I think any Israeli leader would have to see that, and I think in the end, any American government will come back to a concern for it, if for no other reason than a desire to have stability in the region. Tax Cut National Economy<stop><start>Let me turn you quickly to the economy. The Republicans are talking about a retroactive tax cut. You've got an economic statement tomorrow. Are the factors there, is the evidence there strong enough that there's a downturn going on and we need this retroactive tax cut?<stop><start>Well, first of all, the blue chip forecast, I think, is for 2.6 percent growth, which is enough growth to keep the unemployment rate at about 4 percent. And that really doesn't surprise me. When I saw the initial estimates, which were about 3.4 percent, I thought they were a tad high because we've been growing for a couple of years at nearly 5 percent, which is, for an advanced economy of our size, it's just virtually unprecedented. You simply couldn't sustain it at that rate. So I think that the expansion can be continued. On the other hand, there's been a fairly sharp drop in stock values, and that takes a lot of wealth out of the economy, and eventually, that backs down into lower consumption and orders and things like that. So you see, for example, real problems in the steel industry today at a time when steel imports are also dropping. So it's not like the '97 crisis where the crisis in Asia and Russia led people to try to flood the market in America with bargain basement prices. Here, you've got an overall problem. So I think I've always believed that a tax cut should be part of the next budget. I thought it should have been part of the last budget. It can be a little bigger than the one that I proposed, because the surplus has been written up some the estimated surplus. Although I think it's very important that they go back and subtract from the estimated surplus the 10 year costs of the budget we just adopted, because it's the best education budget, for example, that we've had in my 8 years. There's about a 15 percent increase in education. But you have to prorate that out, and President elect Bush has said he's very interested in continuing to support education, even though he wants to kind of rearrange the deck chairs on how we allocated it which is, you know, that's up to him and the Congress. They'll have to work that out. So I think the question is not so much whether one is warranted but what kind of tax cut should it be, and how big should it be? My concern what I have believed in I said this back during the campaign period so I can reiterate it my view is that it should not be so large as to preclude our continued ability to pay down the debt and to stay more or less on the track we're on to get the debt down over the next 10 years, because if the markets perceive that we're going back into deficits, that would lead to an increase in interest rates, which would wipe out the impact of a tax cut for most Americans even wealthy Americans, because it could have a depressing impact on the market, and it certainly would increase the cost of business borrowing and tend to slow down the growth of the economy. So the trick is that also, by the way, would foreclose this is what happened to me when I got in. I didn't have the option to do what Americans would normally the Government would normally do in a recession, which is to have a substantial tax cut and pump the thing back up, because the deficit was so big, it would just have caused interest rates to skyrocket. So the trick for the incoming administration they have lots of options here. They can spend money they can cut taxes they can do more of one or less of the other and less of the other. But the real what I would be thinking about if I were in that position is, what is the aggregate amount we're going to commit here, particularly on the tax cut side, because it's not like you don't have to repeat spending in years 2, 3, and 4. You can cut spending if times are tough. We've proved that. But once the tax money once you cut the taxes, that's normally gone. It's hard to raise taxes when times are tough. So what I hope is, I think they ought to have a tax cut of some magnitude, but I think they ought to save back enough to keep on the track of paying down the debt, which also gives you the protection down the road. Someday, surely, the expansion will come to an end, but I don't think it has to come any time soon. And when it does, the more we pay the debt down, the more free we will be then to have a substantial tax cut to help the country in a recession when that happens sometime in the future without having an adverse impact on interest rates. So I don't think there's any question that they can have a tax cut. It could be fairly sizable. I think it's appropriate. But I just think you don't want it so big that it takes you off the path of getting us out of debt, because the mental knowledge that that's the path we're on keeps interest rates low. The average American family now is saving 2,000 a year on a home mortgage, as compared to where we were back in '93. Long term interest rates are 2 percent lower than when I took office, even though we've had an 8 year expansion, which is unheard of. You normally wouldn't have that. And paying down the debt has a huge impact on that, because it frees up more and more money every year to borrow in the private sector, and interest rates are lower than they would be if the Government were competing. And let me also say there's something else that we should keep in mind. The more you pay down the debt, the lower your interest bill is. I think this year we've got interest payments on the debt down under 12 cents on the dollar. But they were at 13 or something, headed north, when I took office. Let's say we went I'm making this up, of course let's say we went 4 or 5 more years on the same tack, and we got interest on the debt down to 6 cents on the dollar. That's a huge amount of money that is freed up every year for either investment in our future or for tax cuts. And you have more and more and more flexibility. Anyway, that's kind of a long winded answer, but it's a very, very important subject, and I've thought about it a lot.<stop><start>Can I just another foreign policy question one more question.<stop><start>Go ahead. National Missile Defense<stop><start>On NMD, which has become topical now with the Bush administration and Rumsfeld's hearings today, do you regret at all making it a commitment of the United States, since some diplomacy efforts, like with Korea, are working out? And is it just going to create more problems with China, Russia in the future?<stop><start>Well, I think I made the right decision not to deploy. And I think that I made the right decision to continue the research program. And I hope that's what they will do. It's not clear to me exactly how they're going to operationalize their commitment. That is, because in the campaign, the President elect said that he would do this if it could be developed, whether anybody else liked it or not, which bothered some people. But he also the "it" that he was trying to develop was a system that was, in effect, more comprehensive than the more limited one that could have been deployed in the timeframes we were talking about during my tenure. So it may be that what he will decide to do is to intensify research. Look, if we actually knew we had the technology to take missiles out of the sky, even assuming that we get this agreement with North Korea which I think we will get, on freezing the missile production, not selling missiles. I think that will come. That's teed up, and I believe the Bush administration will see it as a great opportunity. And I think it will be one seized within the first few months of the incoming administration. I think it will be one of their first achievements, because it's set, and I think it will happen. But even if that happens, with the proliferation of technology around the world, we can't possibly know who might have missiles in the future. So I think we're almost morally obligated to continue to try to develop this kind of system. However, if we deploy the system in a way that leads to more proliferation and more insecurity, that's very problematic. And it's one of the things that I had to consider, that if we just set it up, even if we were worried about North Korea and the Middle East, if the Chinese interpreted it as a move to try to contain them, even though there's no way we could even if they have just 50 missiles, that's more than or two dozen, whatever they've got two dozen I guess, more or less they might decide that now they need 300. If they did that, the Indians would decide that they needed more, under the present state of play between the two countries. If they did that, the Pakistanis would certainly build more. And circumstances that exist on the Indian Subcontinent are not as stable as those which existed between the United States and the Soviet Union during the cold war, or that exists today between the United States and Russia. And by the way, I expect that there will be a further reduction in nuclear warheads by both countries. That's one thing I think the Bush administration will be in a position to do, because of the development of our relationships, I'll be I expect that President Putin and then President Bush will be successful in continuing to reduce the nuclear arsenals. But you don't want to have all this sort of uncontrolled instability in some other part of the world. But there's a way to continue to work the missile defense issue, and then there would be a way to put it at the service of all countries, the technology, which is what President Reagan used to talk about when he was talking about the Star Wars in the sky and all of that. Philosophically, he had an idea of making it available to all countries so that no one would be any more at risk, including from us. But that technology is not out there now. We're talking about technology to stop the accidental launch or a terrorist or a country with two or three missiles that could lob them at you. Two or three missiles could do a world of damage on the United States or someone else. So I just think I think that I left it with a maximum number of options for the next administration. I've tried to leave the economy with maximum number of options in good shape, and I think this program gives them the maximum number of options. And I think again, you know, we all say things in campaigns, and then you get to be President and it looks a little different. Presidents pretty much do what they promise to do in campaigns, but sometimes when you turn an idea into an operation, when you operationalize your views, the world looks different when you're sitting behind the desk in the Oval Office than it did when you were running for the job. It just does. And that's no criticism of him. They're the same things that looked different to me when I got there. And so I just it's a big issue, but it will be closely covered and widely debated, and I hope it will be resolved in an appropriate way. But I do think that the research should continue. President's Future Plans<stop><start>How are you going to feel on January 21st? You wake up Sunday morning, you won't be President.<stop><start>In Chappaqua.<stop><start>I'm not sure. But I'll say this, right now, I just feel very at peace and very grateful. And I'm going to start thinking about the rest of my life. Every stage of my life has been rewarding and good. And I've been so fortunate, and it's a real challenge. I'm just going to try to imagine how I can make the most of it. I'm kind of looking forward to it. I don't expect that I'll have sort of prolonged periods of semi depression because I'm not President anymore.<stop><start>Withdrawal pains?<stop><start>Yes. I was only halfway kidding when I told the church the other day that I expected to be disoriented when I go into big rooms and nobody plays a song anymore. Laughter I mean, I'm sure there will be somehow some kind of things that will be tough, and I'll have to learn how to be a real citizen all over again, but that's good. The Presidency is what was so well taken care of, and a lot of the cares of normal daily life that I never had to think about when I was in office. It's probably healthy for a person not to have that kind of support for too many years in life. So I'm kind of looking forward to it. President's Pets<stop><start>What about Socks? What's going to happen to Socks?<stop><start>Well, I don't know. You know, I made more progress in the Middle East than I did between Socks and Buddy. Laughter And I don't know that I've got enough space and enough help when I'm gone to keep them both away from one another and keep them both happy. But I still haven't quite resolved what to do. I love that old cat. You know, we picked him up as sort of a half stray in Arkansas, and I hate to give him up. But Betty loves him. Half the White House loves the cat, and the other half loves the dog.<stop><start>You can't break them up into that many pieces.<stop><start>No, no. I'm sure going to take I know I'll take Buddy, because I slept with him for 16 months all during the Senate campaign. He was with me all the time. Laughter I can't live without him. But I really I've even talked to some of the guys, a couple of the guys at the White House are quite good at training pets, and we've all kind of tried to work at this. None of us have been able to figure out how to actually get them in peaceful coexistence. I feel, of all the skills I learned as President in bringing these people together, I didn't do very well with that. Laughter<stop><start>It's been a pleasure, Mr. President.<stop><start>Thank you.<stop><start>Thanks, Steve.<stop><start>Thank you very much, sir.<stop><start>You guys have been great. November 19, 2000 New Vietnam U.S. Relationship<stop><start>Thank you for joining us. We're here in Ho Chi Minh City with the President of the United States, Bill Clinton, this, the last day of his landmark trip here to Vietnam. First, sir, thank you for joining us. The facts speak for themselves. The first U.S. President to visit Vietnam since the end of the war, the first ever to set foot in Hanoi, the Capital. Interested in your thoughts. You've called this a new chapter, turning the page in the relationship. What is it do you think it will mean, first for the people of Vietnam, and also for the people of the United States?<stop><start>Well, of course, I hope it means for the people of Vietnam continued openness and continued prosperity. This country has made a lot of progress in the last few years. The economy is diversifying. It's becoming more open to the rest of the world. Sixty percent of the people are under 30 years old. Most of them have no memory at all of the war, and they are very much oriented toward the future. They are asking themselves all kinds of fundamental questions about what the world is like now, how they're going to relate to it, what their country should be. So I hope that we have opened a new chapter, and I hope it will be good for them and good for us.<stop><start>Now obviously, part of the new chapter is a widely expanded economic relationship. Do you have much confidence it will go beyond that, at least in the short term? After your meeting yesterday with the leader of the Communist Party here, he referred to the United States in a daily newspaper as imperialists, said that he hoped there would be respect for the different way of doing things here. You mentioned in your speech, nationally televised here to university students, the examples of the United States in the areas of individual freedom, religious freedom, political freedom. Do you have much confidence that the Government here, as it accepts and embraces a wider economic relationship with the West, will do anything to bring progress on those other fronts?<stop><start>Well, I think there will be more personal freedoms. You know, I had a roundtable this morning with a lot of young people, and they were asking themselves these same questions. And I believe that as we implement this trade agreement, and then Vietnam moves toward membership in the World Trade Organization, the rule of law will become more important openness will become more important there will be a lot more access to the Internet and information of all kinds and so there will be more freedom. And the question then becomes, when does it become political freedom, or will the political system try to restrict them more, as has been the case in one or two other countries? The truthful answer is, we don't know where it's going. But I think that the trend toward freedom is virtually irreversible, and these folks are too young they're too vigorous. And as you can see in the streets, there is a lot of good will toward America here. There's a lot of interest in our country and how we're dealing with a lot of the challenges of the new century. So I believe that the trend is positive. Now, of course, the political leaders will have their debates, and I had a nice little debate with the General Secretary of the Communist Party here about our country, and I stoutly disputed that we were an imperialist country. We had never had any imperialist designs here. The conflict here was over what self determination for the Vietnamese people really meant and what freedom and independence really meant. But we have a chance to continue that debate now in a more peaceful and more constructive way. And I think the fact that they feel free to engage us in it and then have publicity about it they did, after all, allow my speech to the country to be televised, which I think is a good sign. And the people came out in Hanoi and here in Ho Chi Minh City to see me. So and it wasn't me it was the United States. There's a lot of interest and support for the United States here. So I think we're on the right direction. MIA's POW's<stop><start>I want to ask you about some of the remarkable moments on this trip. If you're sitting back in the United States watching this, we see this only by the numbers nearly 300 sets of remains returned to the United States during your Presidency the money put into the excavation efforts. But it is numbers until you have the opportunity to see what you did yesterday, to actually go out into the field.<stop><start>It was overwhelming. It's very important for the American people to understand that what has made the progress in our relationship with Vietnam possible over these last 8 years has been their cooperation in our efforts to identify and recover and return home our MIA's and to resolve the POW and MIA cases. And we have resolved hundreds of them. And in the cases where we think someone's remains are located, like the site we visited we believe a plane crashed there 33 years ago we believe a pilot's remains are there. His two sons came with me over here. And we watched all those Vietnamese people working with the American people, up to their hips in mud, digging in the ground and taking these big chunks of mud over to sifters, and watching other Vietnamese sift through the mud for any kind of metal object or any cloth object, anything that would give us a clue to whether this was, in fact, a crash site, and whether there's something more down there. It was profoundly moving to me. And it is that good faith effort that they have made with us and by the way, we've made with them. They have 300,000 cases still unresolved. And I brought over about 350,000 pages of documents. We have another million pages of documents we can give them so they can do their own resolution of these cases. That's what's made possible this whole focus on the future and the commercial relations and the educational and health care efforts, all the other things we're doing. Visit to the Joint Task Force Full Accounting Excavation Site<stop><start>What were your personal thoughts? You're standing there holding pieces of the aircraft, a label from a part of the aircraft, your daughter standing next to you, crying. It didn't look like you were terribly far from that yourself. And you're with these two big, grown men who last saw their father when I believe they were 6 and 8. What goes through your mind at a moment like that?<stop><start>Well, first, I was glad we were doing it. I think it made me very proud to be an American and proud that we had made these efforts and made this progress. I was very grateful for the cooperation we've received from the Vietnamese Government and the individual villages. You know, there were just people out there, stomping around in the mud, trying to find some trace of those boys' father. And I think, for me, it symbolized what was best about our country and what was possible in terms of the reconciliation of people who have been so bitterly divided such a long time ago. It's not done yet, you know. We still have a lot of work to do to work through all these cases. I still hope and believe that there should be more freedom within Vietnam and recognition of the courage of the people who fought in the South Vietnamese Army, as well as for the Viet Cong and the North Vietnamese. And I hope and believe that the American Vietnamese community, over a million strong, can make an even greater contribution. Now, today we were at that port, and we talked about a big pharmaceutical facility owned by two Vietnamese American women, sisters, and their presence here in the country. But there are a lot more things that the Vietnamese have to give. But again, to go back to your question, everything begins with what we saw yesterday, the attempt to identify and bring home the remains of everybody who's still here. It was an overwhelming moment, but it should make every American proud.<stop><start>Thank you. We need to take a quick break. But we'll be back in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam, in just a moment to continue our interview with the President of the United States. At this point, CNN took a commercial break. Veterans, the President, and Vietnam<stop><start>I want to ask you a little bit about your personal thoughts and how your personal journey here and your thoughts on it. As a young man, you opposed the war, once wrote that you despised it. Yet as President, with the support of Vietnam veterans, you have led the effort, first to lift the trade embargo, then to normalize relations. As you come here, how do you think this visit will be viewed back in the United States, not just among the veterans' community but especially among the Vietnam veterans' community, and your own personal thoughts on sort of bridging your youth with your role now in trying to create this new relationship?<stop><start>Well, let me answer the two questions separately. First of all, I hope the veterans' community will view it with pride, because nothing that we have done in the last 8 years would have been possible without the support of the Vietnam veterans in the Congress and in the various veterans' organizations Senator John Kerry Senator Bob Kerrey Senator John McCain Senator Chuck Robb Pete Peterson, our Ambassador, who was a POW for 6 1 2 years. The first 3 years, his wife didn't even know he was alive. He never saw his third child until the boy was 6 years old. Pete was in Congress for a lot of this period before I named him to be the Ambassador. So I would think that the veterans' community would be very proud of this. And also, I will reiterate, none of this would have happened if it hadn't been for the cooperation of the Vietnamese with our attempts to resolve our outstanding POW and MIA cases. There's never been anything like it in the entire history of warfare, where two countries worked this hard, this long, invested this kind of money and effort to resolve the POW MIA issues. So I would think, for most of our people who understand that, the central role of the American veterans in the Congress and the country had, this would be a source of great pride. For me, personally, it was interesting my overwhelming feeling when I first got here was thinking about the boys I grew up with who died in Vietnam, four of my high school classmates. And I asked Pete Peterson, when he came back, how long it took him to get beyond thinking about how it was before. And he said, "Well, about an hour," he said. Then he had to deal with the challenges of being Ambassador, and he went on with life. And that's kind of what happened to me. I was the I had a few moments there where I felt I was thinking about the personal tragedies that I had been in contact with when I was a boy. And then the moment intervened, and we went on with the future. Closure on the Vietnam War<stop><start>Do you think the country is at peace with this now? Even some Democrats late in the Presidential campaign this past year tried to raise questions about Governor Bush's service. Do you think the country is ready, and should this trip maybe be the final impetus for the country to move on?<stop><start>I hope it will be. I hope it will be. Because the war divided the Vietnamese from the Americans, but it also divided the Vietnamese one from another and still does which is why, as I said, I went out of my way to praise the heroism of the South Vietnamese soldiers, too, and the importance of the Vietnamese Americans who supported the position we had in Vietnam so long ago and have done so well because of freedom. So we need to heal the rift within the Vietnamese community, and it divided Americans one from another. And I hope that the last 8 years and the journey we've made together in moving forward with Vietnam has helped to put an end to that. My sense is that it did, that we're that at least the rifts are nowhere near what they were 8 years ago, not to mention 10 or 20 years ago. North Korea<stop><start>Let's move around the world quickly. In a matter of weeks, you will hand off to the man who will succeed you, a man as yet unknown and we'll get to that the portfolio on some of the most important strategic relationships in the world. I want to start first with North Korea. You had, at one point, hoped perhaps to follow Secretary Albright and visit North Korea as part of this trip, then decided in the end not enough progress was being made to justify that. Can you be as specific as possible in saying what it is you're looking for from the North Koreans in terms of the missile program and any other steps, and whether you believe it is conceivable that you still might get there before you leave office?<stop><start>Well, I haven't made a decision about whether to go, so I'll answer that first. Specifically, what we seek with the missile program is an end to the long range missile program and an end to the exports of missiles. North Korea needs the foreign exchange money. I understand that they need the funds, and they're very good at making missiles, but the people who are most likely to buy them are those that are most likely to misuse them down the road. So that's what we're trying to do. We also want to ensure the continued vitality of this North South dialog for which President Kim of South Korea won the Nobel Prize, the Nobel Peace Prize, and he certainly deserved it. We want that to go on. And we want to have a sense about what the way forward is with regard to North Korea's relations with us, as well as the South Koreans and the Japanese. So it's conceivable that there could still be a trip, but I just haven't made a decision. The main thing is, I will hand off to my successor a much better situation than I found, because we, first of all, had to end North Korea's nuclear program, and that's what we did and worked on in '93 and '94. And we've been implementing the agreement we made with them then for the last 6 years. Now we're working on the missile program. And it appears that North Korea has made a decision that Kim Chongil has made a decision to have a more positive and open relationship with the rest of the world. And I think that's a very good thing. I think the reconciliation and the family reunifications between North and South Korea are profoundly important. Russia<stop><start>Russia. You met with President Putin during the APEC meeting in Brunei. Your successor, I assume, relatively shortly after he takes office, will receive a proposal from the Russians to go even beyond anything you and the Russians have discussed. Mr. Putin, because of the obvious budget constraints in his country, wants to go to roughly 1,000 strategic warheads. Is that in the interests of the United States national security? And do you see any potential to get to that level, and also, perhaps as part of that deal, get a compromise on the ABM Treaty that would allow the missile defense program to go forward?<stop><start>Well, first of all, I don't want to say anything that will compromise my successor's options. I think that's important. Now, I think it is quite possible that we could agree to go down to fewer missiles in our nuclear arsenal and theirs. I think that it's important that there also be fewer warheads. That is, there's a difference between missiles and warheads. I don't think we ought to go back to highly dangerous, richly armed MIRV missiles, multiple warhead missiles. But what we have to do is to have a target design that we believe is adequate to protect the United States and that our missile component will serve. And if we do that, then we could agree with them to reduce the number of missiles. And I'd hoped that we could get that done even beforehand. So I'm encouraged by that. Now, on the missile defense, I think the trick there will be somehow having the Russians and others with equity interests here believe that we all have a vested interest in trying to develop enough missile defense to stop the rogue states and terrorists from piercing the barriers not only of the United States but of Russia, China, of any other country that might want to participate. And there is a way, I think, to get this done, but it will require a lot of joint research and a lot of trust and a lot of understanding about what the problem is and how we're going to develop it. If the technology existed which would give us high levels of confidence that one or 2 or 5 or 10 missiles could be stopped from coming into the country, it would be hard to justify not putting it up. On the other hand, the reason I didn't go forward is, I think it's very hard to justify wrecking the existing treaty system which has served us so well for so long, in effect, gambling that somehow, some day, some way, the technology will be there. We don't want to do that. The best way to proceed is to do the research and try to find a way to bring these other countries into this. Because, really, if you think about it, everyone should have an interest in the capacity of a country to resist the errant missile or the missile that would be fired by a rogue state or a terrorist. And they can do this together. What I tried to do was to buy some time so my successor could sit down with the Russians, with the Chinese, with any others who are parties and interests and our European allies, of course and try to plot out a future that would leave us safer than we are today. The whole point is to keep getting safer, not to do different things but to have a system which leads to a safer world. And we have to consider what the impact of all these things are on the Indian subcontinent, where there are nuclear missiles on the Chinese who might decide to build acquire a lot more missiles or develop them or not. And so my successor will have time to do all that. And I hope we've given the next President and our partners the maximum number of options.<stop><start>We need to take another short break, but when we come back, we'll ask the President about his thoughts on the crisis in the Middle East, as well as the contested Presidential election back home in the United States. At this point, CNN took a commercial break. Situation in the Middle East<stop><start>I want to ask you, lastly, before asking you about the domestic political situation, I want to ask you lastly about the Middle East. You met separately with Mr. Arafat and Prime Minister Barak before you came on this trip. It has to be a source of enormous personal frustration to you, because of all the time you have put into this. Do you have any reasonable hopes that you can bring the two of them together anytime soon and that we will get anywhere beyond perhaps even just calming the violence before you leave office, and anywhere back toward formal peace negotiations? Is that completely unrealistic at this time?<stop><start>The honest answer is, I don't know, for this reason I don't think they can start negotiating again until we can dramatically reduce the level of violence. It's not clear to me that that's going to happen right now, although I'm working very hard on it, and we've been working hard on it since I've been here. And I wouldn't rule it out. But the tragic thing is that they're not all that far apart on a lot of these big issues and that what we have seen is a sober reminder that the old status quo was not an option. You either have to keep making things better in the Middle East, or eventually they'll get worse.<stop><start>Is the burden on one side or the other? You came away from Sharm al Sheikh cautiously optimistic you would stop the violence, have a cooling off period, and then bring them back together. Obviously, they have not even been able to stop the violence.<stop><start>Well, believe it or not, I still think Sharm al Sheikh was very much worth doing, because, first of all, the agreement that we reached there is pretty much what they'd have to do to get the violence back and set in motion conditions which would lead to a resumption of the peace talks. And I felt before Sharm al Sheikh that we were slipping into a very dangerous situation regionally. And now I think that a lot of the really responsible actors in the region are also trying to get this thing shut down. But I can't really say more than that it's a troubling, difficult, and painful situation, and we've got to find a way to end the violence. You don't have to end every single instance of it, but there has to be a dramatic reduction in the violence before the parties can talk again and make commitments again that could constitute a peace agreement. Is it possible? Yes, it's possible. It's possible because they're not that far apart. But they might as well be on the other side of the globe, as long as all the shooting is going on. So that's what we're working on, and I hope that a way can be found to bring it to an end. 2000 Presidential Election<stop><start>Let me bring your thoughts back home to the United States. When you left on this trip, there was a dispute about who the next President would be. When you made your courtesy call on the Vietnamese President last night, you had to joke that you were hurrying home to see if the country had a Presidentelect. The recount continues, and along with it, the partisan rhetoric escalates. You have people on the Republican side speaking for Governor Bush saying the Democrats are trying to steal the election Democrats on the other hand, saying that the Republicans are trying to deny the people a fair count of the vote and shut down democracy. Is this helpful, in your view? The process is obviously not pretty. Is it helpful what we're hearing from both sides?<stop><start>Well, first of all, I don't know that that's a particularly useful question, with all respect. You can't, as close as this is now it appears that, when all the votes are counted, that Vice President Gore will have won a plurality of the popular vote. It appears that unless he wins Florida, he'll be three votes short in the electoral college. Therefore, everything is on Florida. And Mr. Bush has the narrowest of leads out of 6 million votes, far less than a tenth of a percent, one sixth of one tenth of one percent, or something like that. Now, in an environment like that, you have to assume that either side will try to make the best argument they can, because you only have a whisker of difference. I think the important thing is that there is a process underway, and it is being shepherded by the parties they're both very well represented by articulate, able people and they have recourse to the courts in Florida and the Supreme Court seems to have been willing to be prompt in its decisionmaking. So I think the American people should just let it play out, and they should understand that, with so much at stake, both sides are going to make the strongest case they can. And the only thing that I hope that all of us will keep in mind here is that we don't know who won, but we do know that when people vote, they deserve to have their votes counted, if they can be. So we ought to just respect the process and respect the fact that the advocacy will take place, and it should take place. You can't blame either one of them for making the strongest case they can. This is not a crisis in the American system of government, because it will come to an end. It will come to an end in plenty of time for the new President to take the oath of office. There is a way of resolving these things. All these cases are in the courts, and as I said, it appears to me that they're being handled in a fairly prompt way. Some of the decisions have gone one way, some have gone another way, and we'll just have to see what happens. But I think the American people ought to let this it seems to me the American people are letting this play out in an appropriate way, and that's what I think should be done.<stop><start>Look around the corner, though. You have considerable experience in your own right trying to govern in a very difficult environment, relations with the Republican Congress not terribly good during most of the latter half of your administrations. And now you have research being done on both sides about, well, maybe this will get thrown to the Congress, and can we disqualify electors. Do you see, A, with the election being so close, and then, B, with the very difficult fight over who wins, can whoever gets this job reasonably govern, in your view?<stop><start>Well, I would make two points. First of all, it is true that I faced an unusually partisan group of Republicans. But it's also true that we got a lot done. I mean, I've noticed with some pleasure, I confess, that students of American history, several of them have come out in the last few weeks saying that I had kept a higher percentage of my campaign promises than any President in modern history. And we've gotten a lot done with this Republican Congress, in spite of all the partisanship in the last 6 years. We got a balanced budget agreement. We got welfare reform. We got just this year a sweeping measure on debt relief for the world's poorest nations and any number of other things. I don't want to go through all that, but the point I want to make is that even in a difficult atmosphere, where the Congress is closely divided, and the President is elected by a narrow margin, we should not assume that they won't be able to get something done. If they're willing to work hard, fight for their positions, and then in the end, make principled compromises, quite a lot can be done. That's the first thing I want to say. The second thing is, if you look at American history, it is not inevitable that the person who wins the White House under these circumstances will have a deeply divided country. Now, in 1876, when President Hayes won, he promised to only serve one term. So we don't know whether he could have been reelected or not, when he lost the popular vote and won the electoral college. In 1824 John Quincy Adams won in the House of Representatives when he lost the popular vote, and he was voted out, although he came back and had a wonderful career opposing slavery. But when Thomas Jefferson was forced to go for many, many ballots into the House of Representatives, he came out of it as a more unifying figure, with a commitment to be more unifying. And in effect, he was so successful that he got two terms, and the opposition party, the Federalist Party, disappeared. And then two members of his party, James Madison and James Monroe, succeeded him, and they both had two terms. And arguably, that 24 year period was the biggest period of political stability in the whole history of the republic, until you had the dominance of the Republicans after the Civil War, and then Roosevelt Truman years and the Depression and World War II. So I think you I wouldn't I don't think we should have all these hand wringing, dire predictions. We've got a system. It's underway, and yes, these guys are the advocates for either side are under enormous pressure. And of course, they're being pretty snippy with each other from time to time. But look, you'd expect it. I mean, 100 million people voted, and there's 1,000 votes, more or less, at stake in Florida. So everybody ought to just relax, let the process play out. But don't assume that no matter who wins and no matter what happens, it's going to be bad for America. It might be quite good, because it might be sobering for the country to realize we're in a completely new era. Nobody's got a lock on the truth. We're all trying to understand the future. It's still clear that about two thirds of the American people want a dynamic center that pulls the people together and moves us forward. And I think we still have a fair chance to achieve that. Perspective on the Presidency<stop><start>We're short on time, indeed, out of time, but just in a sentence or two, you've been at this 8 years, and I think you have 8 weeks. What runs through your head when you get up to go to the office every day?<stop><start>I want to get everything done I can possibly do while I'm here. And for the rest, I just feel grateful. America is in much better shape then it was 8 years ago. We got to implement the ideas and the policies that I ran on in '92 and '96. I didn't do everything I wanted to do, but the overwhelming majority of things I wanted to do I was able to accomplish, and I'm grateful that it worked out for the country. And then a lot of other things came up along the way which were good for the country. So I'm happy now, and I'm grateful. And of course, I'm thrilled about Hillary's election to the Senate. And I just feel enormous gratitude. But there's still a lot of things I'd like to do, and so I'll work right up to the end.<stop><start>Mr. President, we thank you very much for your time.<stop><start>Thank you. November 14, 2000 2000 Presidential Election<stop><start>Why don't we start with the election? Do you think either Vice President Gore or Governor Bush is going to be able to govern effectively in a situation as divided and increasingly embittered as it is now?<stop><start>I think it's too soon to draw that conclusion. I think the American people are pretty good about uniting around a President, particularly if the President gets a certain grace period. And I don't think that the circumstances are as rife, or ripe, for discord as they were in '93, where Newt Gingrich was in control and the Republican apparatus in the Congress and had a certain theory about what he was trying to do. I think now the country may be quite sobered by this, and the Congress may be somewhat sobered by it. You might well find that there is a real willingness to work together. The fact that the American people were closely divided on the candidates for President, and would have been closely divided even if Ralph Nader weren't in here, the Vice President would have won the election probably, what, 51.5 to 48.5 or something. That indicates that the American people I don't think that means that they don't believe there's a dynamic center that can be achieved. And I think that's what they will want from the next President and from the next Congress. So I think it's too soon to say that bitterness and partisanship will paralyze the next President. We don't know that, and I hope it won't be the case. This is actually, if you think about it, while it was a hard fought campaign, there wasn't a lot of personal criticism in it some from the Republican side against the Vice President but not nearly as harsh as we've seen in some campaigns of the past and even less from the Democratic side against Governor Bush. There was some, but not much. I think, on balance, it was an election fought out over two different approaches to the country's challenges and opportunities and different positions on specific issues. So I don't think we are necessarily doomed to 4 years of stalemate and partisanship, and I hope that won't be the case.<stop><start>People are talking about the some people were even saying the election is being stolen, and there's all this bitterness, suits. You don't think that that poisons the atmosphere?<stop><start>Well, I think that depends on what happens in the next few days. And so far what I've tried to tell the American people is, they have spoken, and we're trying to determine what they said. I think there's another million or so votes to be counted in California, New York, and Washington State, maybe even a little more. I guess still the some prospect of asking for a recount in Iowa and Wisconsin by the Bush people. And then there's the attempt to resolve all the questions that are out there about the Florida vote. And I think we just you know, the process is underway. Both sides are clearly very equally represented. And I just think we ought to let the thing play out. It will work itself out in some way or another. We've had this happen before. In 1800 Thomas Jefferson was elected in a very divisive, highly partisan election and went into the House of Representatives. I think he even had to vote on the fitness of the electors. He was a sitting Vice President. You know, he gave a very conciliatory Inaugural Address, saying, "We are all Federalists we're all Republicans," and led to a whole new era in American politics, out of what was an exceedingly divisive election. He was reelected, and Mr. Madison was elected, served two terms Mr. Monroe was elected, served two terms. It was actually probably the most stable period in our country's history, in terms of leadership, born out of an exceedingly divisive election in 1800. So I think it depends upon whether the people believe that this whole thing plays out in a fair way. So that's why I've encouraged the American people to just relax, take a deep breath, recognize that a result of this kind is always possible in a democratic election that's hard fought, and that the most important thing is that, when it's all said and done, that people believe that all the issues were resolved in a fair way and that the people franchise was protected and the integrity of the process was. It's unfolding. We just and I think as long as it I just think that's what we ought to keep in mind here. There's lots of time, you know. The Electoral College is not supposed to meet until December 18th Inauguration is January 21st. It's a very stable country, and they're working through it, and we'll see what happens.<stop><start>Are you comfortable with the courts being as heavily involved as they're becoming? Should a judge decide whose vote counts and whose doesn't?<stop><start>I think, in some of these cases, there may not be any alternative, because the right to vote is protected and defined in both State and Federal law. There's probably no alternative here. Now, in the first case, I understand today the judge actually declined to get involved. Isn't that right?<stop><start>Yes, she would not stay the hand counting.<stop><start>I think that the courts probably will be reluctant to be involved as long as they believe that nothing there's been no legal or constitutional infringement on the franchise. We'll just see what happens.<stop><start>The Vice President has gone back to court against the secretary of state's ruling that it has to be done by 5 p.m. tomorrow.<stop><start>Like I said, I've done my best not to comment on the process but just to say it's unfolding both sides are well represented they're arguing their points strongly. We should not expect either side to do anything less than to make their strongest case. That's what they're supposed to do. Electoral College<stop><start>Do you agree with Senator elect Clinton that the Electoral College should be abolished?<stop><start>Well, I have mixed feelings about it. I think the idea first of all, it was established to some extent for practical reasons, as you know, in the 18th century, and the practical reasons are no longer relevant. You know, we know how people voted when they vote. So nobody has to come tell us. The other argument is that it gives some more weight to the small States, because the votes are not proportional to the House of Representatives every State gets the two Senate votes, too, in the Electoral College. And arguably, it gets more attention from the candidates to the small States. Now, I think that ought to be examined. I'm not necessarily sure that's so. For example, if you're a Democrat and you know you're going to lose every State that's not on the Mississippi River, until you get to California, Washington, Oregon, and maybe Nevada, Arizona, New Mexico, would you not go there? Would you be any less likely to go there if there were no Electoral College? Or might you take a run through the high plains and stop in Denver and think that it matters what margin you lose by? Because what happens is, when these candidates have public funds they have limited funds and limited time it affects not only their advertising budget but their travel budget. If you're a Republican and you know you can't win New York, you don't go there. But if you knew that it might make the difference in whether you got 35 or 42 percent of the vote in this case, if you're Al Gore and you don't think you're going to win Ohio, it might make the difference in 46 and 49 percent of the vote might you go? So I don't I'm not quite sure. Again, I believe how this plays out will determine it not only my opinion about it but maybe a lot of people's opinion about it.<stop><start>Do you expect there to be a serious move? I mean, do you think that there is<stop><start>I don't have any idea. I know that Hillary feels strongly about it, and it has really nothing to do with the fact that she's a Senator elect from New York now. But you can ask her why she feels that way. I have mixed feelings. I think that, you know, certainty and clarity of outcome is important, so I think it depends on I think that a lot of people's views will be determined by the sense they have about the fairness and adequacy of this process over the next however long it takes to resolve. And we'll just have to see. Presidential Transition<stop><start>Do you think it's appropriate at this point for either Governor Bush or the Vice President to be planning a transition?<stop><start>I don't think I should comment on what they do. I don't think it's appropriate for me to comment on that. 2000 Presidential Election<stop><start>Do you think that this is going to be resolved by the time you get back to Washington next Monday? Do you think it should be resolved by then? And at what point do you think Americans begin to lose faith in the outcome?<stop><start>I don't know whether it will be resolved when I get back. I don't have an opinion about that. I think the important thing is that the process be resolved in a way that is as fair as possible, meaning that the American people on both sides of this have the highest possible level of confidence that the people who went to the polls and voted that the totals reflect, as far as possible, a fair assessment of the people who went to the polls and voted. And I think that, you know, there are lots of questions out there, and I don't think I should comment on it. There is a process in place. They are both arguing their points strongly, as they both should. And I think that's the most important thing, more than whether it's one week or 8 days or 6 days or 12 days or whatever.<stop><start>Given how far we've come, do you think it's possible that we're going to come out of this and people are going to think it was fair, with all the angry charges that are going back and forth and the court challenges?<stop><start>First of all, this is not just a matter of charges there are certain facts. And I think the facts will come out and be established, and then the disputes about how the factual situation should be handled will be resolved, and people will reach a conclusion about whether they believe that or not. I think it's quite possible that people will think in the end that the matter has been fairly resolved. They may or may not. I certainly hope that they will. But I think it depends upon what the facts are and then how the facts are resolved. But again I say, this process is still in play. I don't think the American people should and I don't think the press should rush to judgment here and just conclude that no matter who is declared the winner that the people who voted for the other candidate will think that something wrong was done. I think it depends on how it is handled and what the facts are.<stop><start>Sir, what's your outside timetable, and what's a reasonable amount of time?<stop><start>I just don't want to comment on it because I don't want to prejudice the process. That would be unfair to both candidates for me to say. I think my role now is to uphold the basic principles of democracy and the integrity of the vote and to ask the American people to give this process a chance to play itself out. Vietnam<stop><start>Moving on to your major stop on this trip, Vietnam. In 1969, which was the last year an American President went to Vietnam, you wrote a letter saying you hated and despised the war and had worked and demonstrated against it. Now that you've been in the position of making decisions of war and peace, do you still feel that way about Vietnam?<stop><start>What I feel about Vietnam is that, thanks in large measure to the bipartisan leadership of Vietnam veterans in the Congress Bob Kerrey, John Kerry, John McCain, Chuck Robb, and Pete Peterson, when he was there, now is our Ambassador the American people have been able to look to the future and hope that a future can be built which opens a new page in our relations with Vietnam, and hopefully one that will put an end to the divisions between the Vietnamese people and the American people and between the American within America and within Vietnam and within the Vietnamese people, including the Vietnamese who are in America, who believed in what we were doing. That's what I think. Now, when we look back on it, the most important thing is that a lot of brave people fought and died in the North Vietnamese Army, the Viet Cong and the South Vietnamese Army and the United States Army our allies, the Republic of Korea and other allies who were there. A lot of people still bear the wounds of war in this country and in Vietnam. And the best thing that we can do to honor the sacrifice and service of those who believed on both sides that what they were doing is right, is to find a way to build a different future, and that's what we're trying to do. Everything I have done for the last 8 years has been premised on that, starting with trying to obtain the fullest possible accounting for the POW's and the MIA's. And none of what I have done, as I say, would have been remotely possible if it hadn't been for John McCain and Chuck Robb and Senator Bob Kerrey and Senator John Kerry and Pete Peterson. They literally made this possible, they and the veterans groups and the Vietnamese living in America who all supported the American position in the war. So I think I don't see this so much as coming to terms with the past as moving forward into the future.<stop><start>Were there ever points when you were grappling with some of these questions in the past 8 years, when you thought about Lyndon Johnson facing those things in that very troubled period and having to make those decisions which, at the time, you very much disagreed with?<stop><start>I see now how hard it was for him. I believe he did what he thought was right under the circumstances. Let me just say parenthetically, I'm glad to see that there is a reassessment going on about the historic importance of President Johnson's term of office, the work he did for the civil rights movement, the Civil Rights Act, the Voting Rights Act. Some people are even beginning to acknowledge that his war on poverty was not a total failure, that in fact poverty was reduced. In fact, we just this year finally had the biggest drop in child poverty since 1966, since Lyndon Johnson was President. And I believe that you know, these decisions are hard. And one of the things that I have learned, too, is when you decide to employ force, there will always be unintended consequences.<stop><start>You talked about all the losses on both sides, 3 million Vietnamese losses, 58,000 Americans. Were all those lives wasted?<stop><start>Well, first of all, I don't think that any person is fit to make that judgment. People fight honorably for what they believe in, and they lose their lives. No one has a right to say that those lives were wasted. I think that would be a travesty. Every war is unfortunate, and when it's over, you always wish it could have been avoided. But I think it's a real mistake to look at it in that way. I think what we have to do is to think about what we can do today and tomorrow and in the years ahead to honor the sacrifice of the people who believed in what they were doing. And I think that for 8 years that's been the policy of this country. And as I said, it had bipartisan support and absolutely critical support from leading veterans in the country in the Congress and in the country.<stop><start>Do you think the United States owes Vietnam an apology for its involvement in the war?<stop><start>No, I don't. MIA's POW's<stop><start>The MIA POW question is very crucial to us and obviously has been through these 8 years. Do you have any feeling about the Vietnamese, who have many, many more people never accounted for after this year is there anything we can do to help them come to terms?<stop><start>I think if there is anything that we can do to help them, we ought to do it. Of course, their people mostly died there, in their country. I think that we should always be in a position of doing whatever we can to help them get whatever information or records we might have to resolve anything on their front. They have let us look at tens of thousands of pages of archives and other pieces of evidence which have helped us to identify hundreds of remains and return them, and we're still working on it. And I think this is something we ought to keep doing together. I think this effort we have undertaken is what made it possible for the veterans groups and the families of the people who are still missing to support this step by step advancement in our relationship. And I think it ought to be a two way street.<stop><start>Do you have any reason to believe that any Americans remain in captivity in Vietnam, after the last American POW's were released in 1973?<stop><start>We have no evidence of it. I know there are people who still believe that may be the case. And all I can say is that every time we've gotten any lead, we've done our best to run it down completely, and we will continue to do that.<stop><start>Nothing has panned out in any of these reported<stop><start>Nothing has panned out. You know, I'm like every other American, I think. I've always hoped against hope that a few of them were still there and still alive and that somehow we could find them. But so far all the rumors and all the leads have turned up dead ends. But I would never close the door on that. If there is ever any indication of anything else, I'd be glad to look into it, and I think any subsequent American Government would. Vietnam U.S. Relations<stop><start>How would you describe Vietnam, in terms of its relationship with the United States? Where are we now? Friend? Partner? How would you describe the relationship?<stop><start>I would say that our relationship is evolving. I think our work on the POW MIA issue has been quite positive and has improved. I think the interviews that they have done of the people we've asked to be approved for relocation to the United States, they've improved that quite a bit in the last couple of years. I would say that the trade agreement is a very good thing, for the same reason I thought it was a good thing for us to make the trade agreement with China. It's not as extensive, and it requires year by year renewal, and will do so until they meet all the terms of becoming members of the World Trade Organization. But it's a very positive thing. I hope that we will continue to see some progress there on the human rights issues. There are still political prisoners, religious prisoners that we feel should be released. And I hope they will continue to do that. We've had some seen some movement there in the last year of the release of some of the Protestants and some Catholics from prison. And I think we have to just keep working on that. And then I hope there will be an opportunity for some educational exchanges. And eventually, I hope that some of the Vietnamese living in America will become part of our ongoing development of relationship, because I think that's kind of the next big step, I think, from our point of view.<stop><start>What do you mean, that the Vietnamese community would become a bridge to their original home or what do you mean?<stop><start>I think that a lot of the Vietnamese living in America, as you know, or as I said, were basically people who were strongly supportive of the position the United States took in the Vietnam war, or their children. But the younger people also want to build a new relationship with Vietnam. They want to see Vietnam modernized. They want to be, I think, eventually reconciled with their relatives or the people that lived in their villages. And I think that over time, we'll see some more contacts there, and that will be positive.<stop><start>Do you ever reflect on what it means for an American President now to go to the place that symbolized and distorted our politics? You know, for much of a generation I mean, if you look at Watergate, Watergate could almost be traced to Vietnam. So much happened because of Vietnam. Is this a new chapter? Is this a closing of that door, do you think, in any way?<stop><start>Well, I think it's a new chapter. The thing that makes America work over time is our ability to visualize new futures and achieve them. We don't need rose colored glasses here. We still have differences with the Vietnamese about the form of government they have. But we've decided to approach them the same way we've approached China, the same way we deal with other countries with whom we have continuing differences. But I think there's a strong sense that it's time to write a new chapter here. This is, after all, this country, the 12th or 13th biggest country in the world. They have about nearly 80 million people, and 60 percent of them are under 30, an enormous percentage of them under 18.<stop><start>So they know of the war, but they didn't experience it the way we did.<stop><start>What they know of the war is what they hear their parents talk about or what they'll learn in history books, the same way that our children do, those of us that are of that age. I think that what we want to do is give them a chance to the Vietnamese a chance to find some greater prosperity, the global economy, and we believe it will bring greater openness to their society and a whole different future for them a different relationship and a different relationship that will involve the Vietnamese who've come to our county and, on the whole, have done so very well in America and enriched our Nation. Situation in the Middle East<stop><start>I was going to ask you if there really is anything left to be done in the Middle East, whether diplomats can now cause what's happening in the streets to stop happening?<stop><start>I think it depends on whether we can reduce the violence to the point where it's possible to resume negotiations.<stop><start>Can you do that?<stop><start>The unbelievable irony of the present situation is, with this level of violence is unfolding in the aftermath of the first serious discussion, official discussion that the Israelis and the Palestinians had, which occurred at Camp David on the serious, difficult final status issues of the Oslo agreement. And I might add, after Camp David, they continued to talk in informal ways. And they know that while there are still differences between them, they are agonizingly close to a resolution of these fundamental issues. I think they also know that violence begets violence and that in the end they're still going to be neighbors. So they're either going to keep killing each other at varying rates with one side feeling beleaguered, the Israelis, and the others feeling oppressed, the Palestinians, or they're going to come to grips with this and complete the process they agreed to complete when they signed the agreement on the White House Lawn in September of 1993. So that's the frustration. The answer to your question is, yes, there's more that can be done, but I do not believe it can be done with this level of violence going on. I just don't think that's possible.<stop><start>How do you get control of that Sharm al Sheikh, you weren't able to do it there. You've had these<stop><start>The Sharm al Sheikh agreement was perfectly fine. It just hasn't been implemented. So that's why I saw Arafat and Barak this week, and I think within in this coming week you'll see whether there is going to be any kind of effort to change course. You know, somebody has got to quit shooting. And I think the demonstrations in the daytime have gone down among the Palestinians, but the nighttime shooting hasn't. I think everyone understands now that it may not be possible for Chairman Arafat to control everything every Palestinian does, immediately. It may not be possible for Prime Minister Barak to control everything every Israeli does, immediately. But this thing can be reduced dramatically if they want to get back to the negotiating table. I think the Israelis will respond in kind if the Palestinian shootings will diminish now. You know, we had a rough day today, and the Palestinians said it was in retaliation for the shooting of the resistance leader the other day. We'll just have to see what happens. But the ironic answer to your question is, every time I talk to them, I come away more convinced that we could actually have an agreement if they could free themselves of this cycle of violence and get back to the negotiating table. And I think if they I think there's a way to do it, and I'm going to try to see what we can do this week. That's all I can say. I'll do my best.<stop><start>A secret plan? A Clinton secret plan?<stop><start>No, I don't have a secret plan. I just think the more I talk about this sort of thing, the harder it is to do. North Korea<stop><start>We wanted to ask you about also North Korea. Did the missile talks fail in Malaysia did they fail to give you what you wanted to hear? How far apart is that, and what's the prospect of a trip there?<stop><start>Well, we're making some progress, but we haven't resolved it all. We think it's quite important to work out an arrangement with them in which, one, we stop the missile development they stop the missile development and the sales of missiles. Now, they obviously need to earn some funds from some other places, and we think there are ways they can do that. Secondly, we want to keep the North South dialog going. We strongly support what President Kim Dae jung did with Chairman Chongil. We think that was a good thing to do, and we think it ought to continue. And we want to also continue the agreement we made with them early in my term, which ended the nuclear development program, which when I became President, I was told by my predecessors that it was the most serious national security problem we were facing at the time. So I wouldn't rule out or in a trip, if that's where you're going on this. I just think the most important thing is that we're engaged with them and we're making constructive progress. And I hope we can make more before my tenure is over, because I think it will leave my successor an easier time. President's Accomplishments and Regrets<stop><start>What's your greatest personal satisfaction of your 8 years, as you near the end of them? And what's your greatest personal disappointment?<stop><start>Oh, that's hard to say it's hard to say on both counts. My greatest personal satisfaction, I think, is that our country is in so much better shape than it was 8 years ago and not just economically. I think it's economically probably the strongest it has ever been, but it's also a more equal society. We have incomes rising at all levels for the first time in three decades. We have a big drop in poverty. We have a big drop in crime. We have the welfare rolls cut in half. We have fewer people without health insurance, for the first time in a dozen years. Performance of our students in the schools is getting better. We have more minority kids taking advanced placement courses and going on to college. And I think in each of these areas we've had policies which have contributed to this. We also have a real I think there is more social cohesion, notwithstanding the division of this vote. We've got 150,000 kids serving in AmeriCorps, more than served in the Peace Corps in the first 20 years. We've had, I think, a real attempt to try to bridge the racial divide in this country and deal with those issues and confront a lot of the problems that still exist in America. So I feel good about both the fact that the country is in better shape and, I think, there is a lot of self confidence, a sense of possibility in this country. I think in part that explains how free people felt to debate the issues in the last campaign and to make their choices. I'm very, very grateful for that. And I will leave office with that sense of gratitude, because I think that's what every President wants to do. Every President wants to feel that during his tenure of service, America grew stronger and healthier and better. I feel good about where we are in our relations with the rest of the world. I think we've basically been a force for peace and prosperity. What is my greatest regret? I may not be able to say yet. I really wanted, with all my heart, to finish the Oslo peace process, because I believe that if Israel and the Palestinians could be reconciled, first the State of Israel would be secure, which is very important to me personally and, I think, to the American people secondly, the Palestinians would be in control of their own destiny third, a peace with Syria would follow shortly and fourth, the Middle East would not only be stable, which is good for America's interests, and not just because of the oil but the forces of progress and prosperity progress and reconciliation, excuse me would be stronger in all countries, including Iran. And I felt that I really think this is a sort of linchpin which could lead to a wave of positive developments all across the region. And I think that's very important. Most of the people in the Middle East are young there are all these kids out there. What are they going to are they going to be raised to believe their faith requires them to hate the Israelis and the Americans and anybody else that's not part of their faith and politics? Are they going to be perpetually poor, even if they have a fairly decent education? Are we going to see that whole region being integrated into a global system and these children having a whole different future, in which they're reconciled with their neighbors in Israel and deeply involved in the world in a positive way? Are they going to be using the Internet to talk to terrorist cells about chemical and biological weapons, or are they going to be using the Internet to figure out how to grow new businesses and have new opportunities and build new futures for their families and their children? So if it doesn't happen, I'll be profoundly disappointed, but I'll never regret a minute I spent on it because I think it's very important for the future. I have never bought the thesis on an inevitable collision course with the Islamic societies, or that the 21st century had to be dominated by terrorists with highly sophisticated weapons, fueled by broad popular resentment from people who are both disenfranchised and poor. I don't think it has to be that way, and I think if we could really make a big dent in this problem, it would give confidence to the forces of reason and progress throughout the region. November 02, 2000<stop><start>Four more years! Four more years! Laughter Morning Show Commercials<stop><start>What I want to know is, where did you make that ad where you walk in the White House and the house comes down?<stop><start>This is an ad that runs in Washington for our radio station.<stop><start>Do your listeners know that you actually tore the White House down? Do they know that? Laughter Have you concealed that from them? Laughter<stop><start>You watched that, huh?<stop><start>I do.<stop><start>We have a commercial that runs in the Washington area where anyway. Laughter<stop><start>He walks into a mockup of the White House and it comes down. Laughter<stop><start>I'm glad you watched that. I'm glad to know that you listen to the show.<stop><start>I keep up with you.<stop><start>Thank you, sir. And we keep up with you, too, and sincerely, it would be nice if we could get 4 more years from you. It's been a good 8 years for us. 2000 Election<stop><start>But you can get the next best thing. I'll tell you, we've got to win this election, and I feel very strongly that we're going to win it if our folks vote. All these polls that show it close and show Governor Bush a point or two ahead, all those polls are premised on an assumption that African American and Hispanic voters and first generation immigrants will not vote in the same percentages that the Republican base will vote. That's what they're premised on. I remember in Mississippi last year, where the African American vote equaled the white vote, for the first time ever, a Democratic candidate for Governor was elected by 6,300 votes. And he was six points behind in the polls. So that's what the power here is with the young people and with the folks that have done well in these last 8 years. One of the things that I want to point out that I'm proudest of is that we fought for policies and Al Gore fought for policies that would guarantee that when this economy came back, for the first time in 30 years, it wouldn't just be the wealthiest Americans who would do well. They would do well, but everybody else would do well, too. Average income has gone up by over 5,000 in this country, and African American unemployment is at the lowest point in history. And I think that alone is a good argument to stick with this economic policy, especially when the alternative is going back to deficits and underinvesting in education.<stop><start>And Mr. President, history has shown that with the votes that have or with the election such as 1960 and even '68, how just one vote in maybe a ward or two would have made a difference and turned history around then, too.<stop><start>Oh, absolutely. John Kennedy won by four tenths of one percent. Hubert Humphrey lost by a percent. Jimmy Carter won by a percent, one vote out of 100. And this race could well be that close. And I can tell you there are at least five States today that are within one percent. There are another five States that are within 2 percent. That's how close this election is. Ralph Nader Youth Vote<stop><start>And the Republicans are buying spots for Ralph Nader in some of these States.<stop><start>They are buying spots for Nader? What does that tell you?<stop><start>Yeah.<stop><start>You know, one of the things that bothers me is that I think young people have the biggest stake in this election and may feel alienated from it because so much of the debate has been about Social Security and Medicare drug programs for seniors. But I'd like to make a couple of points about that for young people. First of all, I'm the oldest of the baby boomers. I'm 54 years old. And one of the reasons that the young people should care about this debate is all the people my age are very worried that when we retire that is, people between the ages of 36 and 54, that's the baby boom when we retire we don't want to impose a burden on our children and on our grandchildren. So that's a big issue. So when Al Gore says, "I'll put 20 years on the life of Social Security," and his opponent says, "I'll take a trillion dollars out of the Social Security Trust Fund," that's a big difference there. And it's important. But also, our administration has a good environmental record. That's going to be more important for the future. Al Gore knows more about technology, how to maximize the benefits of the Internet, how to close the digital divide, how to create new economic opportunities in underserved areas, areas that still haven't fully felt the prosperity, which is a big issue. He's worked on that for 8 years now through our empowerment zones, and we've got a plan to get billions and billions of dollars in investment in new businesses and new jobs in the areas that still have unemployment that is too high or income that's too low. So I think the young people have the biggest stake of all in this election. Supreme Court Republican Congress<stop><start>And also, when you think about the Supreme Court, sir, and what<stop><start>Huge issue.<stop><start>you've done with the Supreme Court and the ability to carry on into the next<stop><start>Yes. I only got two appointments, I regret to say, but they have upheld civil rights, and they've upheld a woman's right to choose, and they've upheld the right of the National Government to protect the interest of the American people. But there are we're one vote away from reversing Roe v. Wade, and we are dangerously close to something that could be even more severe. We're dangerously close to a permanent majority on this Court that will restrict the ability of the United States Government, both the President and the Congress, to protect the American people in fundamental ways. This Court had five votes to invalidate a provision of the Brady bill, which is the background check law on handguns, because it required the States to help. They invalidated a section of the violence against women law because it required the States to help. They invalidated a provision of a law against age discrimination. I mean, so I cannot the American people have probably no idea how important that is. And one other thing I'd like to say We've got a chance to win the House and the Senate. But if we don't, there needs to be somebody here in the White House to restrain this Republican Congress. Let's not forget all the things they've tried to do that I stopped. They tried to shut down the Department of Education. They had the biggest education cuts in history, the biggest environmental cuts in history. They've tried to pass all kinds of restrictions on our ability to protect the health and safety of people in the workplace. So that's another big point.<stop><start>They turned your hair from black to white.<stop><start>They turned my hair from black to white. I earned every one of these gray hairs. Laughter First Lady's Senate Campaign<stop><start>And wouldn't it be nice to have two Democratic Senators from the great State of New York?<stop><start>Oh, that would be really nice. You know, I'm really proud of Hillary, and I knew that she was doing well when her opponent made 500,000 phone calls accusing her of being tied to terrorists. That was really sinking to the bottom of the barrel. Laughter And I think she's got that turned around. She's up there trying to run on the issues. I mean, I think that if people care about education, if they care about child care, if they think about balancing work and family, if they want younger people, as well as older people, to have access to health insurance, people like Hillary and Al Gore and Joe Lieberman, those are the kind of people we need to be promoting, because this country is in great shape. But we need to build on what we've got, not reverse it. President's Future Plans<stop><start>That's right, sir. And sir, I'm going to say it now because I probably won't get a chance to say it before you leave office. We're going to really miss you.<stop><start>Thank you so much, sir.<stop><start>Well, I hope you'll you know, call me now and then. We'll still talk on the radio. Laughter You may be the only guy who wants to talk to me when I'm not President anymore. Laughter<stop><start>I know, because now the Republicans don't even want you to practice law. They've tried to hold that up on you, too.<stop><start>I know. Well, they tell me that after the for 3 or 4 months I'll be lost when I leave office because when I walk in a room, nobody will play a song anymore. Laughter<stop><start>We'll play a song for you.<stop><start>We'll play some old school yeah.<stop><start>one of your songs for "Hail To The Chief" how's that?<stop><start>There you go.<stop><start>Because we know what you like. Laughter<stop><start>You've got a deal.<stop><start>All right, President Clinton. 2000 Election<stop><start>Again, I just want to say I hope everybody listens you've got to show up Tuesday. You've got to be there. I mean, this election is every bit as important as the one that elected me in 1992. We've turned the country around. The last thing we need to do is go in reverse.<stop><start>All right.<stop><start>Thank you.<stop><start>Thank you, sir.<stop><start>Bye bye. November 02, 2000<stop><start>Thank you for your time I appreciate it. It takes time to do something like this.<stop><start>Good. 2000 Presidential Election<stop><start>Why do you think the race is so tight, given the economy, the issues, the incumbency? How could it get to be this close?<stop><start>Well, I think for one thing, things have been good for a long time, and I think a lot of people may take it for granted and may not have they may not be as clear as they should be, which I hope we can use the last week to do, on what specific policies contributed to it and what could undermine it. I think that's one issue. I also think that, you know, there's not as much general awareness as there might be about the differences between the two parties on health care, education, the environment, and crime, where I believe that the things we've done over the last 8 years had a measurable impact on all those things going in the right direction. And a lot of most Presidential races are fairly close, you know, because a lot of Presidential voting is cultural.<stop><start>The way you were raised.<stop><start>Well, the way you were raised and sort of the neighborhood you live in, your socioeconomic and ethnic background. I mean, a lot of it's cultural. So I think there are a lot of reasons it's close. Also, keep in mind, in the history of our Republic, only two Vice Presidents have ever been directly elected President. One of them when Martin Van Buren succeeded Andrew Jackson, we were effectively a one party country then. And the other, when George Bush defeated Michael Dukakis, the country was not in as good a shape as it is now, but it was in pretty good shape, and Bush basically destroyed Dukakis. It was a hugely negative campaign with a lot of charges that were never effectively rebutted. So this has been a much more positive race. There have been differences on the issues, but neither one of them has called each other's patriotism into question or whether they're normal Americans. Basically, the rap that was put on Dukakis was like reverse plastic surgery. So I think that that explains it largely. Demands of the Presidency<stop><start>At the end of the interview, I'm going to ask you to make a bet with me. What physical change in you says that you've served 8 years and it's a job that really takes a toll?<stop><start>Well, I think I'm in better shape, better health than I was 8 years ago, in a lot of ways. My hair is gray. I think that's about it. I've got a few wrinkles I didn't have 8 years ago. But I've held up pretty well. I've had a good time. I've enjoyed it. I couldn't help my hair going gray. It would probably have gone gray if I hadn't become President. Oklahoma City and Columbine<stop><start>One of the most important jobs that you, as a President, have is to talk to the country in the wake of national tragedies, frame the issues for the American people. I'm going to ask you about two of the things that happened during your two terms the Oklahoma City bombing and the Columbine shootings. Where were you when you first heard about the Oklahoma City bombing, and what was your first reaction, personally? And then how did you think you should frame that to the American people, to help them understand what's really a national trauma? And where were you when you heard it?<stop><start>I was in the White House. I believe I was in the White House, because I remember making a statement at the beginning, right in the Rose Garden, saying what you would expect me to say, expressing the Nation's sympathy for the loss but also urging the American people not to jump to conclusions about who had done it. Remember in the beginning, there were a lot of people saying it was obviously some sort of act of foreign terrorism. There was one man that was brought back on an airplane. He was flying out of the country through to London, and he was brought back, suspected of maybe being involved, and he wasn't. And of course, subsequently, it was a domestic terrorist act. But then when I went to Oklahoma, at the memorial service, what I tried to do was to elevate what the people who had been working in that building were doing. They were all public servants, and it was at a time when it was quite fashionable to bash the Government. And I told myself, even, that I would never refer to people who worked for the Government even in agencies I thought weren't performing well as bureaucrats again, because this whole we have gotten, for more than a dozen years, a sort of demeaning rhetoric about the nature of Government and the nature of public service. And I tried to point out that these people were our friends and our neighbors and our relatives, and they were an important part of America's family and that their service ought to be honored in that way. And also, obviously, I took a strong stand against terrorism. And I was able later I went to Michigan State and gave a commencement speech and tried to amplify on that. But I really believe that was the turning of the tide in the venom of anti Government feeling.<stop><start>Did you see was it a conscience thought to you that this could be the turning of the tide, and if you focused it correctly, if you said, "You know, you can't love your country if you hate your Government," that this would crystallize that feeling?<stop><start>I think I felt that after I had some time to think about it. In the beginning I was just horrified about all those people dying, all those little kids killed and hurt.<stop><start>What I'm trying to get at is, once beyond that obvious first reaction<stop><start>Yes. I mean, it occurred to me that, you know, the American people are fundamentally decent, and they've got a lot of sense. And I thought that this might break a fever that had been gripping us for too long. And I think it did.<stop><start>And you thought, if I can take advantage of this opportunity I mean, to have this tragedy in every tragedy comes an opportunity, so is this an opportunity where I can make people rethink that idea.<stop><start>I think in a way, at least at some maybe not even at a conscious level, the American people were rethinking it. And I think maybe that's why what I said at the memorial service struck a responsive chord in the country.<stop><start>What I'm trying to get at is, was that a deliberate thought on your part? That I have an opportunity as President to<stop><start>Well, I thought that yes, I was conscious of what I was saying.<stop><start>Did you connect it in some way to a kind of metaphorical bomb throwing of Newt Gingrich, of the real anti Government stance that he was taking at the time?<stop><start>I was careful not to do that. I wanted it to change the American peoples' attitude toward public servants and their Government. But to do it, you had to focus on what happened. One of the things that I didn't like about Newt and he certainly wasn't responsible in any way for the Oklahoma City bombing because one of the things I didn't like about him is, he was always blaming the 1960's or liberals for everything that went wrong. When that woman, Susan Smith, drove her kids into the lake in South Carolina, he blamed the 1960's, and it turned out that the poor woman had been sexually abused by her father, her stepfather, who was on the local board of the Christian Coalition or something. And when that woman dropped her kid out of the window in Chicago, he blamed the welfare culture. He was always blaming. So I didn't want to get into where I was doing reverse blame. I just wanted to try to make it clear to the American people that we shouldn't have a presumption against Government in general or public servants in particular.<stop><start>What about Columbine? Where did you first hear the news about that? And again, what was your reaction to that?<stop><start>I believe I was in the White House when I heard that, but I'm not sure. But I know that I called the local officials and the school officials from the Oval Office. You know, that was only the most recent and the most grotesque of a whole series of highly visible school shootings that we've had a number of them in the South, one of them in Jonesboro, Arkansas. That was in my home State, and I knew some of the people who were involved, who run the school and in the county and in the city. There was one in Pearl, Mississippi, and there was<stop><start>One in Oregon.<stop><start>The one in Springfield, Oregon. What I thought there was that I thought a lot of things. I thought, number one, how did those kids get all those guns, and how could they have had that kind of arsenal without their parents knowing? And I thought, after I read a little about it, how did they get so lost without anybody finding them before they went over the edge? We had a spate of before all these killings associated with that kind of darkness on the net, network<stop><start>What do you mean, darkness on the net?<stop><start>Well, those kids were apparently into some sort of a weren't they into some sort of satanic like thing?<stop><start>No, they had their websites and<stop><start>Their websites, yes. There were, earlier, a number of kids who killed themselves who were into talking to each other about destruction, but they weren't killing other people. And I just kept I worry that I worried then I worry now about the people in our society, particularly children, that just drift off, and no one knows, or people feel helpless to do anything about it. You know, I couldn't help thinking, wondering whether those kids could have been saved if somebody got to them, and then whether all those other children would still be alive. Gun Safety Legislation<stop><start>It seemed shocking to me and a lot of other people that after that there was no we didn't get any new gun control legislation after an event like that.<stop><start>It's going to be interesting to see what the voters in Colorado do. They have a provision on the ballot now in Colorado to close the gun show loophole. And it's a heavily Republican State, and I think it's going to pass.<stop><start>Right.<stop><start>I think what happened is that well, first of all, you can't say nothing came out of it, because there was an organization of young people in Colorado that then organized kids all over the country for commonsense gun legislation. They got about 10,000 kids involved. Now we have the Million Mom March, and they're very active. But the truth is that when legislation time comes that a lot of the people in Congress are still frightened of the NRA, because even though there is broad public support for these measures, they are still not primary voting issues for a lot of the people who are for them. Whereas, the NRA can muster an enormous percentage of the vote maybe 15 percent, maybe even 20 sometimes for whom that's a primary voting issue. So if you've got an issue where you're ahead 60 30 but in your 60 it's a primary voting issue for 10 percent of the people, and in their 30 it's a primary voting issue for 20 percent of the people, the truth is, you're a net loser by 10 percent. That's the way that's what happens in Congress and State legislatures. They're genuinely afraid.<stop><start>They know they could lose their seats.<stop><start>You see the tirade that Charlton Heston has carried on against Al Gore and me, before saying that I was glad some of these people were killed because it gave me an excuse to take people's guns away. We never proposed anything that would take anybody's guns away. I saw a special you may have seen it on television the other night on ABC. Peter Jennings actually went out and went to some of these gun shows. And he was talking to all these people who were absolutely convinced that we wanted to take their guns away. The NRA is great at raising money and building their organizational power by terrifying people with inflammatory rhetoric. I guess that's why, since LBJ passed the first law after Bobby Kennedy was killed, I was the first President to take him on.<stop><start>You got Brady and assault through, but why didn't you take the opportunity with this post Columbine atmosphere? I mean, you called the White House Conference on Violence immediately<stop><start>Well, I did. I tried<stop><start>But it focused on, like, violence in the media<stop><start>Yes, but we also did lots and lots and lots of events<stop><start>and then you thought you could reason with the NRA.<stop><start>No, I didn't think I could reason with the NRA. I thought Congress would be so shocked and the public was so galvanized that we had a window of opportunity.<stop><start>Right. And what happened to that, is my question.<stop><start>The Republican leadership just delayed until the fever went down. That's what happened. They knew that they couldn't afford to have their Members voting wrong on closing the gun show loophole or banning the importation of large capacity ammunition clips, which allows people to get around the assault weapons ban.<stop><start>Were you powerless to do something about that?<stop><start>No, we had tons of events. And we got a vote if you'll remember, we finally got a vote in the Senate, where you can bring things up, where we got a majority vote for it. Al Gore broke the tie another reason he ought to be President, he broke the tie. But we couldn't get a bill out of a conference committee, that had it in there. If we could ever have gotten a clean vote<stop><start>You would have won that vote.<stop><start>Oh, absolutely.<stop><start>And beat that<stop><start>Absolutely. We could win the vote today if you could get a vote. But the leadership of the Republican Party, as long as they're in the majority in both Houses, they can control things, especially in the House. You can write the rules so that you can just keep stuff from coming up.<stop><start>So despite your power, despite that event<stop><start>Yes. And we had lots and lots and lots of events at the White House, not just one. We had a ton of events. We brought people in. We talked about it. We pushed and pushed. We finally got the vote in the Senate. We got 50 votes. Then Al broke the tie. We got 51. And there's no question that we could pass it. But I'll remind you that one of reasons that Democrats are in the minority today in the House is because of the Brady law and the assault weapons ban. And interestingly enough, we didn't there is not a single hunter has missed an hour not a single sport shooter has missed an event an hour hunting I should have finished the sentence or a single sport shooter has missed an event. But they acted like the end of the world, but a half million felons, fugitives, and stalkers haven't gotten handguns because of the Brady law. The ironic thing is, there's no reason here when we tried to pass the Brady law they said, "Well, this won't do any good because all these criminals get their guns either one on one or at gun shows or urban flea markets."<stop><start>Let me change the subject. This is absolutely amazing<stop><start>I feel passionately about this, and I'm glad I took them on. I'm just sorry I couldn't win more. There are a lot of good people out there in America who work hard their only recreation is hunting and fishing they don't follow politics all that closely they get these NRA mailings. They're good people, but they think they can believe these folks. And they know that if they can stir them up, they can raise more money and increase their membership. And they do it by basically terrifying Congress. Race Relations<stop><start>How would you characterize race relations today, as compared to when you took office?<stop><start>I think they're considerably better.<stop><start>In what ways?<stop><start>Well, I think, first of all, the country is changing. It's growing ever more diverse and, therefore, more and more people are having more contacts across racial, ethnic, and religious lines. And I think that, ultimately, the more people relate to each other, the more they come to not just tolerate I don't like the word "tolerance" in this context because it implies that one group is superior, putting up with an inferior group and tolerating them. I think the more they come to genuinely appreciate each other's heritage, find it interesting, and find a fundamental common humanity I think a lot of it is just systematic human contact. And beyond the human contact, I think that the race initiative we started led to hundreds of efforts all over the country to have honest conversations. You know, sometimes people work around each other for years and they don't know the first thing about one another. Forget about race. I mean, there are people who probably work in the White House who see each other every day that don't know the first thing about one another. So I think that the one thing we did was to spark all these conversations and also to highlight systematic efforts that were working in local communities and try to get them replicated around the country in communities, in workplaces, in schools. I think that there was a genuine effort to deal with that. I think the third thing is that we may have had some impact on it, I and my administration, because we were so much more diverse than any other administration in history. And I think people felt, who had never felt that way before, that the White House was their house, too the Government was their Government, too. So I think the climate in the country was positive for that.<stop><start>And you sense that change in climate from those factors in<stop><start>Absolutely. Look at the difference<stop><start>Because this is one of your main priorities?<stop><start>Yes. And look at the difference in the rhetoric in the Presidential campaign this year. All the rhetoric is about racial inclusion. Now you know, we could argue about the policies. I think that the Republican policies are still divisive, but the rhetoric is about inclusion. And even they a number of their members have taken a different tack on immigration. Advice for Youth<stop><start>Do you have any special message to young people, any sort of valedictorian thoughts to the kids in school right now, as you leave office?<stop><start>Yes, I do. First of all, I think that they should realize that they're very fortunate to be living in this country at this time, fortunate because of our economic prosperity, fortunate because of our enormous diversity, and fortunate because of the permeation of technology in our society, all of which enables us to relate to the rest of the world and to one another in different and better ways. Secondly, I think they should understand that our future success is not guaranteed and depends upon their interest in public affairs, as well as their private lives and their participation. One of the things that's really concerned me about this election is all these articles that say that young people think there is not much in it for them. I think maybe that's because there has been a lot of debate about Social Security and Medicare in the debate. They think that's an old folks' issue. But it's actually not just an old folks' issue, because when all of us baby boomers retire and I'm the oldest of the baby boomers the baby boomers are people that are between the ages now of 54 and 36. So when we retire, unless everybody starts having babies at a much more rapid rate, or we have hugely greater immigration, there will only be two people working for every one person drawing Social Security. Now, more of us are going to have to work into our later years. And more of us have a choice now because one of the good things that Congress did unanimously was to lift the earnings limit on Social Security. But anyway, even the Social Security issue is a youth issue. Why? Because the baby boomers, most of them, I know, are obsessed with our retirement not imposing an undue burden on our children and our grandchildren. But there are all these other issues. We have to build a clean energy future to avoid global warming. Two stunning studies have come out in the last month, and because of the Presidential campaign, they've not been much noticed. One analysis of a polar icecap says that the 1990's were the warmest decade in a thousand years. The other projecting study estimates that if we don't change our greenhouse gas emissions, the climate could warm between 2.4 and 10 degrees over the next century 2.4 is too much. Ten degrees would literally flood a lot of Louisiana and Florida. This is a very serious thing. Then you've got this incredible scientific and technological revolution that will lead to, among other things if you just take the human genome alone, a lot of the young people in America today, when they have their children, they'll get a little gene card to take home with them from the hospital, and their children will be born with a life expectancy of 90 years, because they'll be able to avoid so many of the illnesses and problems that they have a biological propensity to. So this is a fascinating time to be alive, but it's not free of challenges. So I would say to the young people, you ought to be grateful you're alive at this time. You'll probably live in the most prosperous, interesting time in human history, but there are a lot of big challenges out there, and you have to be public citizens as well as private people. Drugs and the Legal System<stop><start>Do you think that people should go to jail for possessing or using or even selling small amounts of marijuana?<stop><start>I think, first of all<stop><start>This is after we're not publishing until after the election.<stop><start>I think that most small amounts of marijuana have been decriminalized in most places and should be. I think that what we really need one of the things that I ran out of time before I could do is a reexamination of our entire policy on imprisonment. Some people deliberately hurt other people. And if they get out of prison if they get in prison and they get out, they'll hurt them again. And they ought to be in jail because they can't be trusted to be on the streets. Some people do things that are so serious, they have to be put in jail to discourage other people from doing similar things. But a lot of people are in prison today because they, themselves, have drug problems or alcohol problems. And too many of them are getting out particularly out of the State systems without treatment, without education, without skills, without serious effort at job placement.<stop><start>You're talking about any offender?<stop><start>Yes. But there are tons of people in prison who are nonviolent offenders, who have drug related charges that are directly related to their own drug problems.<stop><start>Don't you think those people should we be putting nonviolent drug offenders in jail at all, or should we put them in treatment programs that are more fitting and not<stop><start>I think it depends on what they did. You know, I have some experience with this. Let me just say<stop><start>Well, I remember your experience is based on your brother's<stop><start>Well, let me just say about my brother whom I love and am immensely proud of, because he kicked a big cocaine habit I mean, his habit got up to 4 grams a day. He had a serious, serious habit. He was lucky to live through that. But if he hadn't had the constitution of an ox, he might not have. I think if he hadn't gone to prison, actually been put away forcibly somewhere, I think his problem was so serious, it is doubtful that he would have come to grips with it. I mean, he was still denying that he was addicted right up until the time that he was sentenced. So I'm not so sure that incarceration is all bad, even for drug offenders, depending on the facts. I think there are some<stop><start>I meant<stop><start>Let me finish. I think the sentences in many cases are too long for non violent offenders. I think the sentences are too long, and the facilities are not structured to maximize success when the people get out. Keep in mind, 90 percent of the people that are in the penitentiary are going to get out. So society's real interest is seeing that we maximize the chance that when they get out, that they can go back to being productive citizens, that they'll get jobs, they'll pay taxes, they'll be good fathers and mothers, that they'll do good things. I think this whole thing needs to be re examined. Even in the Federal system, these sentencing guidelines<stop><start>You've got mandatory minimums. Would you do away with those?<stop><start>Well, most judges think we should. I certainly think they should be reexamined and the disparities are unconscionable between crack and powdered cocaine. I tried to change the disparities, and the Republican Congress was willing to narrow, but not eliminate, them on the theory that people who use crack are more violent than people who use cocaine. Well, what they really meant was that people who use crack are more likely to be poor and, coincidentally, black or brown and, therefore, not have money. Whereas, people who use cocaine were more likely to be rich, pay for it, and therefore be peaceable. But my own view is, if you do something violent, it's appropriate to have an incarceration. But I think we need a serious re examination in the view toward what would make us a more peaceful, more productive society. I think some of this, our imprisonment policies, are counterproductive. And now, you know, you have in a lot of places where, before the economy picked up, prison building was a main source of economic activity, and prison employment was one of the big areas of job growth.<stop><start>Do you think people should lose access to college loans because they've been convicted of smoking pot which is now law?<stop><start>No. I think that, first of all<stop><start>I mean, those are people that seem to need a loan the most.<stop><start>First of all, I don't believe, by and large, in permanent lifetime penalties. There is a bill in Congress today that has bipartisan support that I was hoping would pass before I left office, but I feel confident it will in the next year or 2 which would restore voting rights to people after their full sentences have been discharged, and they wouldn't have to apply for a Federal pardon to get it. I changed the law in Arkansas. When I was attorney general I changed the voting rights law in 1977, to restore voting rights to people when they had discharged their sentence. And my State is one of the relatively few States in the country where you do not have to get a pardon from the Governor to register to vote again or from the Federal Government, for that matter. Look, it depends on what your theory is. But I don't believe in making people wear a chain for life. If they get a sentence from a jury, if they serve it under the law, if they discharge their sentence, the rest of us have an interest in a safe society, in a successful society, and seeing that these folks go back to productive lives. You know, keeping them with a scarlet letter on their forehead for the rest of their lives and a chain around their neck is not very productive.<stop><start>Just to wrap this up, do you think that we need a major rethink of what these drug sentencing laws are?<stop><start>Not just drugs. I think we need to look at who's in prison, what are the facts<stop><start>Well, they're filled with drug prisoners, these jails.<stop><start>most of them are related to drug or alcohol abuse, but there are some non violent offenders unrelated to drug or alcohol abuse, which is not to say that I don't think white collar criminals should ever go to jail. But I think we need to examine the natural tendency of the American people, because most of us are law abiding, is to think when somebody does something bad, we ought to put them in jail and throw the key away. And what I think is, we need a discriminating view. There are some people who should be put in jail and throw the key away, because they can't help hurting other people. And I believe that one of the reasons for the declining crime rate is that we have a higher percentage of the people in jail who commit a lot of the crimes a very small percentage of the people are multiple, habitual criminals. And if you could get a significant percentage of them in jail, the crime rate goes way down. Now, on the other hand, there are a whole lot of other people in jail who will never commit another crime, particularly if they have if they get free of drugs or free of their alcohol abuse and if they get education and training and if somebody will give them a job and give them another chance. And what I think we need is a serious reexamination of what we've done, because we've done a lot of good in identifying people who are habitual criminals and keeping them in prison longer, and that's one of the reasons that the crime rate has gone down, along with community policing and improving the economy. But we also have just captured a whole lot of people who are in jail, I think, longer than they need to be in prison and then get out without adequate drug treatment, job training, or job placement. But the society is moving on this. I notice now back in Washington, there is a really good program where maybe two, that I know where they try to keep people who go to prison in touch with their children, and they use the Internet so they can E mail back and forth. They try to, in other words, not cut people off so completely that they lose all hope and all incentive of returning to normal life, and they try not to damage these kids so badly, to reduce the chances that the kids will follow in their parents' footsteps.<stop><start>Let me change the subject.<stop><start>I think we need a whole new look at that. The sentencing guidelines, the disparities, are only a part of it. We have to look at how long should certain people go to prison from the point of view of what's good for society. We need to completely rethink it, because criminal laws and sentencing tend to be passed sort of seriatim in response to social problems at the moment.<stop><start>You, in general, restored judicial discretion and replace the kind of panic legislation that was passed about crack or<stop><start>The reasons for the sentencing guidelines in the first place was to try to reduce the arbitrary harshness. It wasn't because they wanted to make sure everybody went to jail for a while it was because the citizen guidelines tended to be abusive on the other end of the spectrum. I think we may need some sentencing guidelines, but I think the impact, the practical impact of the ones we have has led to some people going to prison for longer than they should and longer than they would have under the old system. So there should be some more flexibility than there is. Military Action in the Balkans<stop><start>I'm going to change the subject. The Balkans was your only major military engagement. What was it like to run a war night after night? I mean, was it your mentality in feeling that as all of that was going on as you go to sleep every night?<stop><start>Well, I went to sleep every night praying that it would end that night and that Milosevic would give in, praying that no other<stop><start>You were literally praying?<stop><start>Yes. Praying that nobody would die, no American would die, and hoping that no innocent civilians would die but knowing that they would. You know, it's easy for people to talk about war when it's appropriate to use military force, but you have to know that once human beings start using big, powerful weapons, there will be unintended consequences. We wound up bombing the Chinese Embassy. Innocent people died. We hit a schoolbus. And we have the most skilled Air Force and the most sophisticated weapons in all human history. In the Gulf war, which is normally thought of as a 100 hour war and a model of sort of technical proficiency, we had 4 1 2 months to settle in and prepare there, and still a lot of the American casualties were from friendly fire. The same thing happened even in the small engagement in Grenada and President Reagan. These things happen. There are once you start killing people, there will be unintended consequences.<stop><start>How do you get yourself personally comfortable I mean, how do you get yourself, as a person and as a politician, ready to make that decision with a level of comfort you're now going to go ahead and do this?<stop><start>You have to be convinced that the consequences of inaction would be more damaging to more people and to your country. And in the case of Kosovo, I didn't think it was a close case. They had already killed several thousand Kosovars, and they were running a million of them out of their homes, 800,000. It was a clean case of ethnic cleansing. And I thought the United States and our European Allies had to stand up against it. We couldn't let it happen in the heart of Europe. If we did that, we would lose the ability to stop it anywhere else.<stop><start>And wouldn't it be on your conscience in some way, for having failed to stop it?<stop><start>Absolutely. Look, it took us one of the things that just tore at me and in the end it didn't require much military engagement, although it required some was how long it took me to build a consensus. It took me 2 years to build a consensus among our Allies for military action in Bosnia. And you know, what happened there was, after the slaughter at Srebrenica we finally got you know, everybody said, "Okay, let's go" we did a few air strikes, and all of a sudden we were at Dayton and the peace talks. And for all the raggedness of it, the Bosnian peace has held, and it's better now because we turned back the tide of ethnic cleansing. But over 200,000 people died there. And I just knew, you know, there is no point in letting it happen again in Kosovo. Rwanda<stop><start>How do you feel, then, about Rwanda? I mean, clearly it's a difference. You didn't have the allies you didn't have intelligence, all kinds of things. Is there anything that we could have done to prevent it? And whether there was or not, it happened while you were President. Do you feel any responsibility in that, personally?<stop><start>I feel terrible about it. One of the reasons that I went to Tanzania to be with Mandela and try to talk to the Burundians into the peace agreement because before my time, over 200,000 people were killed in Burundi. Same deal the Hutus and the Tutsis, same tribes, fighting the same battles. In Rwanda the thing that was shocking about Rwanda was that it happened so fast, and it happened with almost no guns. The idea that 700,000 people could be killed in 100 days, mostly with machetes, is hard to believe. It was an alien territory we weren't familiar. After that, we began working very earnestly in Africa to train troops to be able to go in and prevent such things. We worked very hard with something called the Africa Crisis Response Initiative. And when I was in Senegal, I actually went out of Dakar to another city to watch a training exercise at least a parade exercise and talk to the troops from Senegal that our American soldiers were working with. We are now working with the Ghanaian forces and Nigerian forces to give them the training and the capacity to prevent the resumption of the slaughter of Sierra Leone. So I think that I hope the United States will be much, much more involved in Africa from now on, and everywhere. In economic development, we passed the Africa trade bill this year in fighting AIDS, TB, malaria in Africa in debt relief, we passed a big debt relief legislation this year and in helping them to develop the mechanisms to do this. The African countries have leaders who are willing to go in and take their responsibility in these areas if we'll give them the logistical and other support necessary to do it, if they're trained to do it. That's what happened in East Timor, where we didn't have to put troops on the ground, but we sent 500 people over there and provided vital airlift and logistical and other support, so that the Australians and New Zealanders and the other troops that came in could bring an end to the slaughter there. So I think that there is there is sort of a sliding scale here. In Europe it had to be done by NATO, and the scale of it and the power of the Serbian Government was such that if we hadn't been directly involved with our NATO Allies, we never could have turned it back and Milosevic never would have fallen. If we hadn't stopped him in Bosnia and Kosovo and kept the sanctions on, the people would never have had the chance to vote him out. So I feel good about that. I wish we had been Rwanda, if we had done all the things we've done since Rwanda and Africa training the troops, supporting them, working with them what I think would have happened is, the African troops would have moved in they would have stopped it and we could have given them the logistical support they needed to stop it. Now, there are other problems that may develop<stop><start>Another reason to vote for Gore.<stop><start>Another huge reason to vote for Gore, because, you know, Governor Bush has said that he doesn't think that's the business of the American military. We're only supposed to fight and win wars and let everybody else do this. He kept talking about Kosovo, I noticed, in a way as if we were the only forces in Kosovo. We were only 15 percent of the soldiers in Kosovo. Presidential Politics<stop><start>Let me change the subject, back to Washington. Why do you think you were such a lightning rod for partisanship and bitterness and so much hatred during your term now?<stop><start>I think there were a lot of reasons. I think mostly it's just because I won. The Republicans really didn't they believe the only reason they lost in '76 to Jimmy Carter was because of Watergate. They believe that, from the time Mr. Nixon won in '68, they had found a fool proof formula to hold the White House forever, until some third party came on. That's what they believe.<stop><start>Did you ever hear anybody articulate that, the Republicans<stop><start>Well, in so many words. I had a very candid relationship with a lot of those guys. They would tell me what was going on. I think they really believed that America saw Republicans as the guarantor of the country's security and values and prudence in financial matters, and that they could always turn Democrats into cardboard cutouts of what they really were they could sort of caricature them as almost un American and that basically the Congress might be Democratic most of the time because the Congress would give things to the American people. But the Republicans embodied the values, the strength, the heritage of the country, and they could always sort of do, as I said about Dukakis, reverse plastic surgery any Democrat. So I came along, and I had ideas on crime and welfare and economic management and foreign policy that were difficult for them to characterize in that way. And we won. And they were really mad. I think I was the first President in a long time that never got a day's honeymoon. I mean, they started on me the next day. I think that was one thing. I think, secondly, I was the first baby boomer President, not a perfect person, never planned to be I mean, never claimed to be and had opposed the Vietnam war. So I think that made them doubly angry because they thought I was a cultural alien, and I made it anyway.<stop><start>Do you think that the cultural<stop><start>Southern Baptist, because the dominant culture of the Republican Party President Reagan put a nicer image on it. But the dominant culture were basically white southern Protestant men who led the surge of the new Republican Party, first under President Nixon and the silent majority and, you know, blue collar people, and then it came to an apotheosis under President Reagan. So I think that, you know, they didn't like losing the White House, and they didn't like me, and they didn't like what they thought I represented. And that all happened at the time you had this huge growth in conservative talk shows and these you know, sort of associated think tanks and groups and networks that grew up in Washington from the time of Nixon through the time of Bush. And I think they had sort of a permanent alternative Government set up by that time. And they went to war the first day of my Presidency.<stop><start>Because you were the most threatening politically, and they despised what you represented culturally, age wise and<stop><start>think they honestly disagreed with me on a lot of the issues as well, but a lot of it was, they were mad they weren't in, which is one of the reasons they're working so hard now. And one of the big challenges that we face in the closing days of this election is to motivate the people that agree with us to the level that they're motivated. Just because they've been out a long time, they want back in really badly. Early Democratic Policy Differences<stop><start>Were you surprised about the difficulties you had in your own party with Sam Nunn on the gays thing and Moynihan on health care and Kerrey on the economic plan?<stop><start>Not particularly, because I'll come back to the gays in the military.<stop><start>Don't, because we've run through that. But just insofar as Nunn?<stop><start>No. And the answer to that is, no, because a lot of the Democrats who were culturally conservative and pro military thought that gays in the military coming up so early was inconsistent with the whole New Democratic approach we were taking. Plus which, they thought I was wrong. But as I explained to you, I think when we talked last, I didn't bring it up first. Bob Dole did. Now, on the other issues, the fundamental problems there was that there were no easy answers. I mean, Bob Kerrey comes from Nebraska. He and Jim Exon were Democrats, but Nebraska is one of the most Republican States in the country, and I think, you know, he thought we should have maybe cut spending a little more or raised taxes a little less, or cut taxes a little less on lower income working people so we wouldn't have to raise it as much, you know. And I think and we'd been through that tough Presidential campaign.<stop><start>These guys were like, you know, the party elders.<stop><start>Well, Moynihan believed<stop><start>Generally, they should like say, "Well, he's our new President." That's<stop><start>But I didn't take offense to that. Moynihan believed, first of all, with some justification, that he knew more about most areas of social policy than anybody else did. I think he thought we were making a political mistake not to do welfare reform first, which turned out to be right. We did make a political mistake not to do welfare reform first. And secondly, I think he felt that the system in Washington could not absorb in a 2 year period the economic plan which he strongly supported. He was terrific. The NAFTA trade agreement, which he strongly supported, which was controversial within our party, and then this major health care thing. He really didn't believe and he's told me that, you know, he said, you know, "We just don't have time to do these." He said, "The system cannot absorb this much change in this short a time." And you know, that was a mistake I made. Hillary gets a bum rap for that. That was basically my fault, because I knew that basically there's only two ways to get to universal coverage. You either have to have a taxpayer subsidy, which is what we've done now with the Children's Health Insurance Program, because now we've got the number of uninsured people going down in America for the first time in a dozen years, primarily because in the Balanced Budget Act, we insisted the Democrats did on getting the Children's Health Insurance Program, which is the biggest expansion of Government financed health care since Medicaid. You either have to do it that way or you have to have an employer mandate where the employers have to provide the health insurance, and then you exempt smaller businesses and subsidize that somewhat.<stop><start>You<stop><start>I didn't take offense at it. You know, they thought I was being bullheaded, and I think, in retrospect, they were probably right. Newt Gingrich<stop><start>What was your relationship with Newt like?<stop><start>I had an unusual relationship with him. First of all<stop><start>Was it<stop><start>It depended on which Newt showed up. But I thought the good Newt, I found engaging, intelligent, and that we were surprisingly in agreement in the way we viewed the world.<stop><start>similar<stop><start>Partly. But you know, Newt supported me in virtually all of my foreign policy initiatives. And after he got his Congress, he realized that a hundred of them had never had a passport. I remember him calling me once, wanting me to get them to go on foreign missions. He said, "If you ask them, then they can't be attacked back home for boondoggle trips." So we actually had a very cordial relationship. He was also very candid with me about his political objectives. And he, in turn, from time to time, would get in trouble with the rightwing of his own caucus because they said I could talk him into too much. We had a pretty good relationship. You know, on the other hand, as I told you, when he did things like blaming every bad thing that happened in America on Democrats in the 1960's and all that, I thought it was highly destructive.<stop><start>How did he make you feel, personally?<stop><start>At some point, probably around 1996, I got to the point where I no longer had personal feelings about those things. But you know, things like the Whitewater investigation and the Travel Office investigation he was smart. He knew there was nothing in that stuff. It was all politics to him. It was about power. But he really did believe that the object of politics was to destroy your opponent. And you know, he ran Jim Wright out of the Congress on account of that. That's what he thought he was doing. And he had an enormous amount of success in the beginning, and he won the Congress basically by having that take no prisoners, be against everything approach.<stop><start>Didn't he tell you once on the phone that he was planning to lead a revolution against you?<stop><start>Well, he thought he was leading a revolution, and I was in the way. And I think he really believed, after '94<stop><start>What did you think when he says this to you? "I'm out there to destroy I'm going to take you on. You're through."<stop><start>I thought he was a worthy adversary, and I thought I would defeat him, because I thought the American people would stick with me. But I thought he was a very worthy adversary. I think he thought that he could create, for the rest of my Presidency, a sort of an almost a parliamentary system where he would be the prime minister and make the policy, and I'd be in charge of foreign policy, and he'd help me.<stop><start>I mean, historically, the Newt versus Bill, I was just trying to think back, there hasn't been as powerful I mean, powerful and as antagonistic a Speaker to the President, not in modern times. You had an actual enemy. You had somebody actually out there daily fighting you, not a not a Lyndon, not a McCormack. Everybody went with Reagan and gave him what he wanted.<stop><start>That's what they decided to do. And you know, now I have a Speaker in Hastert I can really work with. We've got a lot done. But he still has the dominant power in the caucus is Tom DeLay and Dick Armey. And if they had their druthers, you know, they'd still follow that approach. But the balance of authority is so power is so close in the House that more often than not, we work things out. But in the Senate, you've got the same thing with Lott. You know, Lott I have a very cordial personal relationship with. I have a lot in common with Lott in terms of our background and childhood and, you know, that whole thing. His daddy was a laboring person. He could have well been a Democrat.<stop><start>How did you develop your strategy in sort of dealing with Newt and outflanking him? Just wait him out? Give him enough rope?<stop><start>Well, that's part of it. You know, I felt after they won that when the people actually saw the fine print on their contract, they would think that there was a contract on America instead of a contract with America. And then I felt that I had to oppose them when I thought they were wrong. But I couldn't let them push me back into the old confrontation where they could say, "Clinton's an old Democrat. He's defending everything, even the indefensible, so you may think we're going too far, but America has to change," because this is a country in constant change. So that was for example, instead of just fighting them on the budget, I offered my own balanced budget.<stop><start>I mean, everybody I think Democrats really wanted to attack him back as quickly as possible, and you took a much more conciliatory<stop><start>That's because I felt they had to have a chance to run their and then when we got to the Government shutdown, I wasn't just against what they were doing I had an alternative. See, I believe and I think it's more important, I think it's easier for Republicans to be against everything than Democrats because people view us as the party of affirmative Government. And since I believed in balancing the budget, I just didn't want to do it the way they wanted to.<stop><start>What's your bottom line on Newt, historically? I mean, what's your if you were an historian, what would you say about Gingrich?<stop><start>That he was immensely successful in, first of all, consolidating the power of the Republican Party and its rightwing and then in winning the Congress, winning the historic struggle for Congress in '94 by opposing me right down the line. And in '94, the people the economy was getting better, but people didn't feel it yet. The budget we passed did not impose great tax burdens on ordinary Americans, but they didn't know it yet. And the crime bill we passed was going to help bring the crime rate down without interfering with people's gun rights, but they didn't know it yet. So you had the best of all times to run through a gaping hole. And then I had made the mistake of trying to do both, trying to do the economic plan and NAFTA, which dispirited some of our base supporters. And then I tried to do health care under circumstances that were literally impossible. You could not get a universal coverage plan passed through Congress. So I made a lot of errors, and he ran through them, and he therefore changed the Congress. Then I think people will say that we had one of these historic battles that periodically happens in America about the role of the National Government and, indeed, what the meaning of the Nation is. And I think he thought he could actually carry out the revolution that President Reagan talked about, you know, drastically shrinking the Federal Government, drastically limiting its ability to act in the social sphere and moving it to the right. And to me, we had a series of battles that were really the latest incarnation of this ageold battle of what does it mean to be an American, what is the idea of America, what is the purpose of a nation? And there was a Government shutdown. There was an impeachment. There was my veto of the Newt tax bill after Newt was gone. All these were ongoing battles. The battle over the same thing is now happening, shaping up over the courts. The most important issue in this election may well be what happens to the courts. Because there is now already we are one vote away from having enough votes that would repeal Roe v.Wade. But there is this other issue in the courts which I think is quite profound, which is, there are five votes right now to restrict the ability of Congress to require the States to participate in protecting the American people in a lot of fundamental ways. So I think this is an ongoing battle. But it's the same battle that we had between George Washington and John Adams and Alexander Hamilton and John Marshall on the one side and Thomas Jefferson, Thomas Payne, and a lot of other people on the other in the beginning the same battle Abraham Lincoln had around the time of the Civil War. Could the States secede? Did the Federal Government have the power to enslave them? The same battle we had at the dawn of the industrial revolution when Theodore Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson asserted the authority of the Nation to proscribe basic conditions in the workplace and protection. And it was the same battle that Franklin Roosevelt fought. That was the fourth time it was fought. Now we're in the fifth battle over how to define America. And in the first three skirmishes, we won. But I see that as a big issue in this election, a huge issue. Impeachment<stop><start>Let's talk about impeachment a little. You're going to in the history books, it's going to say, of course, that you were the second President ever to be impeached. How does that make you feel? Do you feel that that will cloud your real accomplishments?<stop><start>Well, that's for the historians to determine. The history books will also record, I think, that both impeachments were wrong, and that's when they failed. And I'm just grateful that, unlike Andrew Johnson, I was less embittered by it and I had more support from the public and in the Congress, so I was able to resume my duties and actually get a lot done for the American people in the aftermath.<stop><start>Was there ever a point where you wanted to give up or it just became too hard?<stop><start>Never.<stop><start>Did you ever get so angry during it that you think it clouded your judgment?<stop><start>I got angry, but I always was alone or with friends who would deflate me, so I don't think it ever clouded my judgment on any official thing I took. You know, I realized that when it was all over, I would have the responsibility to work with the Republicans, as well as the Democrats. One of the things I had to learn as I said, it took me almost my whole first term to learn it is that at some point Presidents are not permitted to have personal feelings. When you manifest your anger in public, it should be on behalf of the American people and the values that they believe and the things they do. You just can't a lot of this stuff you can't take personally and especially when I realized that for the people that were directing it, it was just politics. You know, it was about power and politics. So I was largely able to purge myself of it. And I had very strong personal feelings about it, but I tried never to talk about it. I tried to get up every day and just do my job and let others defend me publicly and go on with the work of the country, because<stop><start>in private?<stop><start>Yes, because Presidents will always be under siege in some way or another. And if you don't want the job and the attendant heat, you shouldn't ask for it.<stop><start>Does it make you uncomfortable to talk about this episode now?<stop><start>I just think the less I say about it right now, the better. I think the more time passes, the more people will see what happens, and the more it will come out. There have been some pretty good books written about it.<stop><start>What do you think of Ken Starr now?<stop><start>I think he did what he was hired to do.<stop><start>You told me you never really met him and had no ill feelings.<stop><start>I met him. You know, I met him once when he interviewed me. He was hired to keep the impeachment thing I mean, to keep the inquiry going past the '96 election and to do whatever damage he could. That's why he was put in, and he did what they asked him to do.<stop><start>What's your take on Henry Hyde, who was supposedly "Mr. Reasonable," and then he seemed to defy the will of the people after the '98 elections, where he kind of got repudiated?<stop><start>Well, he did what he was hired to do, too. I mean, the rightwing was in control of the Congress, and they thought they had paid in '98, and they thought they would never have to pay again. They thought it was a free shot to put a hit on me, and so they did. I don't think it's complicated.<stop><start>Once the elections were done, I remember seeing you a week before, and clearly Democrats were going to take the House in a way they had never taken it before in an off election. And it was a referendum on this issue, and then they went ahead him and the Republican leadership went ahead despite that. What does that tell you about them?<stop><start>That they wanted to they stayed with their rightwing, and they thought they would pay no price in 2000, because they thought, whatever happened, it would all be over by now. And they thought they could put a black mark on me in history, and that was really important to them. They were really angry. They got beat. They were just angry, and they thought they had paid once, and they wouldn't have to pay this time, because the American people would move on to other things as they always do. And so they did it.<stop><start>It's not an issue now in this election, really.<stop><start>It is in three or four House seats, but not many.<stop><start>It's an issue to me.<stop><start>But it shouldn't be. I've tried the only way it should be an issue in the election is that it indicates how important it is, if they should maintain their majority, they have somebody in the White House that can restrain them. Because it's just an example of other things they were doing to the environmental laws of the country, to the education laws, to the health care system. That's the only way it should be an issue. It's over. The American people shouldn't be expected to dwell on it. They shouldn't have to deal with it.<stop><start>Who do you think really came through for you and got up and defended you?<stop><start>Oh, tons of people. The House judiciary committee Democrats were really good. There were 800 people, including a lot of Republicans who didn't even like me, who filed testimony talking about how inappropriate it was. Then there was that bipartisan panel of career prosecutors who said that no one would bring any criminal charges on this. So a lot of people who came forward who had no particular reason to do it but who cared about their country and were offended by what was going on.<stop><start>Do you think in some way this is sort of a referendum on sort of the nature of morality or the character of America in some way?<stop><start>Not really. No, I think people strongly disagree with what I did. I did, too. I think the I don't think the I think that they just were able to discriminate between a bad personal mistake and the justification for a Constitutional crisis. I think I don't think that it I think it said more about their ability to discriminate between two different kinds of problems than any changed moral standards.<stop><start>In the sixties we always talked still they talk about karma, you know, your karma? Did you ever look at it in terms of what's in my karma that I got this shit hammer dropped on me?<stop><start>No. Like I said no, I don't. If I hadn't made a personal mistake, they wouldn't have the pretext to do what they did, even though what they did was wrong. So no, I don't.<stop><start>Do you think it benefited us, that process, that we learned from all that, from the impeachment process?<stop><start>Well, the one thing it did was it pointed out all the other excesses. You know that there was a bogus Whitewater investigation. It was totally bogus and wasted money and<stop><start>What was that?<stop><start>The Whitewater investigation. That civil lawsuit against me was bogus. Even the judge, who was famous for disliking me personally, threw it out as having no merit. So I think that what it did was, at least for the time being, it took a lot of the venom out of our public life. You know, even as hard as George Bush and Al Gore are hitting each other now in this election, they are by and large hitting at each other over the issues. I mean, Bush has got some ad up now questioning Gore's integrity, which is amazing that Bush would question Gore's integrity, but anyway. But he knows that there's a certain number of voters who vote for Republicans because they're convinced that they're morally superior to Democrats, not withstanding the fact that we're awash in evidence now that they're not. And so he's doing that, but there has been very little of that, even from him. They're basically the level of venom is lower than it was. And maybe I absorbed enough for several years. And if so, then that alone might make it worth doing. Because I think it's just crazy for America with all these fabulous opportunities and some pretty stiff challenges out there to waste our elections and our public officials' time with things that we know are bogus or trivial and cost the taxpayers a fortune, for no other purpose than for one side to pursue political advantage over another. There will always be some of that, but my instinct is that in the next 4 years, we'll have a lot less of it. Relations With the Media<stop><start>The press as President, you have a relationship with the press that is unique to anybody in the world. You, as an individual, there's certainly more scrutiny or criticism or attention, more everything. What's your take on the press in America?<stop><start>Well, I think that, first of all, it's very difficult to generalize. I think that on the balance, it's a great advantage for the President to have a bully pulpit that can reach everyone in America and everyone in the world instantaneously. And any criticisms that a President has about negative press or incessant carping or whatever you've got to temper that with the fact that they make it possible for you to do your job in a communications age. And they work especially the working press, I have an enormous amount of respect for them. I mean these people that are on this airplane, because I've worked hard and I keep long hours, it's a hard job for them, because they have to they go around in the vans, not in Air Force One or the helicopters. They have a lot of hard work to do, and I think by and large, most of them do it as well as they can and as honestly as they can. I have an enormous amount of respect for them. Now, there's another part of the press that are kind of part of almost a celebrity political press that are that go all the way from the columnists to the people that are on all these talk shows all the time. And they have in order for them to be successful, their comments have to have edge. They tend to be more negative and more dogmatic in their attempts to be and sometimes there is more heat than light in a lot of what's said in a lot of those forums formats. But that's part of the new age we're living in. And also they're sort of on the cutting edge between the serious press, the tabloid press, and pure political advocacy and entertainment. You've got all these segments now that are kind of blurred together, compounded by a 24 hour news cycle, and the fact that there are umptydump channels people can watch, some of which are news channels that know they have to go after narrowly segmented markets, and they're targeting certain audiences. So it's a very different press environment, and if you took it all seriously, it would run you nuts. But you can't once you realize kind of what the environment is, you just learn to deal with it. I think the important thing is to for Presidents, especially to try to hear the criticism, because it's not always wrong. Sometimes it's right. I find it easier, really, when it comes from thoughtful columnists who are really trying to make a serious contribution to the national debate. Even in some other forums it's important.<stop><start>Which columnists or reporters do you think have been particularly good or particularly smart in their coverage of you in the last 8 years?<stop><start>Well, I think just in terms of columnists, I think Tom Friedman is the best foreign policy writer we have today, by a long stretch. I think he understands the world we're living in and the one toward which we're moving. Therefore, whether he's criticizing me or analyzing an issue or whatever he's doing, he's trying to do it from a completely honest point of view of trying to say, here's where the world is here's where we're going. I think Ron Brownstein is one of the best political columnists in America today, one of the two or three best. He's truly extraordinary. And you know, he understands this whole New Democrat movement that I have been a part of. He understood the ideas that underlay the '92 campaign and the whole Democratic Leadership Council effort, everything we're trying to do. And he made it his business to study that. I think he's very good. I think E.J. Dionne is good. I regret that his other responsibilities at the Post don't give him time to write more columns, because I think he's very good.<stop><start>Inaudible towards the Times for their role in Whitewater?<stop><start>No, I think that it was sort of like this Wen Ho Lee deal in a way. I mean, the same guy got a story, and it was kind of overwritten, and dire things were predicted. But I think whatever I feel about that, it has to be tempered by the fact that the Times has a serious conscience when it comes to the national issues. I don't think the I think they had a they really have tried consistently to think on the public issues, I think they really have done an excellent job of analysis and are trying to come out in the right place in the right way. So whatever I feel about that is tempered by that.<stop><start>Do you think institutionally it's working right, the press as a whole, the major newspapers, the networks, and so forth?<stop><start>I think they're doing the best they can in a very new and different environment. I have a lot of sympathy with them.<stop><start>So you don't have resentment towards them? Like, a lot of Presidents just hated once done, they just hated them.<stop><start>No. Absolutely not. You know, how can Presidents hate the press? I mean, they give you you can gripe all you want about all the negative coverage you get on the evening news or on these talk shows or being blasted in the newspaper or having to get on something where they're dead wrong like on Whitewater, whatever it is dead wrong, but still, every day they're right in all kinds of other things about all the things that affect the American people and their lives. And anytime you want a microphone to have your say, you've got it. So I think to be obsessively negative is a mistake. The White House<stop><start>What creature comforts are you going to miss the most about leaving the White House, not living there?<stop><start>The movie theater, the swimming pool, Camp David. Everybody says I'll miss Air Force One the most once I have to return to commercial travel. But what I will miss the most is not the creature comforts it's the honor of living in the White House, which I have loved. I've loved living there, because I love my country I love the history of my country. I know I was a pretty good American historian before I got there, and I know a lot more than I did then, and I've read a lot about Presidents that most people don't know much about, including me before I got there. And even more than that, I'll miss the work. It's the job I'll miss the most. I love the work. I actually have loved doing this job.<stop><start>Do you just get off every single day when you get up, just I am so lucky?<stop><start>Even the worst day. Even in the worst times the whole impeachment thing I just thank God every day I can go to work. I love the job. I've always loved it.<stop><start>Looking at the other side of the coin, what is there anything that seems attractive to you about not living there anymore?<stop><start>Well, I look forward to kind of having being a citizen again. It will be the first time in 20 years you know, I've been I was Governor for 12 years, and 10 years, the last 10 years in a row so it will be the first time in 18 years that I've really had a private home that was my primary residence, and where I'll get up every day, feeling a responsibility to be of public service, but knowing that I'm basically in control of my life again. And it will be an interesting challenge for me. Eighteen years is a long time to be a chief executive, living in public housing, with every day scripted out you know, hours and hours a day, particularly if you work like I do. It's a challenge, and I'm going to be interested to see whether I can meet it and what it means, you know, to go into this next chapter of my life. I'm actually excited about it. Advice for the Next President<stop><start>What's the one thing about being what's the one thing that would surprise either Bush or Gore about being President that they just can't know now? What was the greatest surprise to you? What advice would you give the next President?<stop><start>I think they will be surprised how many different things happen at once. Now, Al won't be as surprised by that, because he's been there 8 years. It's another good argument for voting for him, because he's experienced and he makes good decisions. He'll be a very good President if he wins. He'll be quite good. He makes good decisions, and he's had experience. And the environment, I think, will be less hostile for either one of them than it was for me, and they will have more of an opportunity to craft cooperative solutions, because almost under any conceivable scenario, the Congress will be even more closely divided than it is now. You know, the Democrats are going to pick up some seats in the Senate. They might even be in control. But if they are, they will just have a one seat majority here, too, and I think the Democrats will win the House. But if they do, they won't have any bigger majority than the Republicans do now, maybe a little more, but not much. So you will have a very closely divided Government which will require them to all work together. So I think they may have a less hostile environment than I did, and I hope they do, but I think they'll still be surprised at how many different things they'll have crash in on them at once.<stop><start>What would you tell them to do? You say, look, here's what you've got to do as the next President. Here's what I would like you to do.<stop><start>Well, first of all, I think after the election, they ought to get more rest than I did. You know, I didn't really take a vacation. I think they ought to clear their heads. I would advise them to work as hard as they can to get a good Cabinet and a good staff, and then really emphasize teamwork, and when you come to the tough decisions, do what you think is right. A lot of these decisions, you know, that were unpopular that I made Bosnia, Haiti, debt relief in Mexico, taking on the NRA, doing the debt thing reducing the deficit, I mean, right now, it's like smooth sailing. But it's just not in the nature of human existence to be free of difficulty. And I think when you come down to those tough decisions, you just have to do what you think is right, tell the American people why you did it, and hope they'll go along with you. 2000 Presidential Election<stop><start>So this comes out after the election. So do you want to give me a prediction.<stop><start>I've always believed Gore will win, and I still do. And I think if he doesn't, the only reason that I think that he might not win is if they vote a higher percentage of the people that want Bush to be President vote than the percentage of people that want Gore to be President. But I believe if we get an even turnout, I think in the closing days of this election, people will begin to think about whether they really want to risk this prosperity by adopting an economic plan that has a huge tax cut, a huge Social Security privatization program, and a bunch of spending that will put us back into deficit. I think that people have to think about whether they want to risk having nobody to restrain a Republican Congress if they should stay in the majority, and I think they will think about what will happen to the courts. And so I think that those things will be enough to put Al Gore over, and I think he'll be elected.<stop><start>What do you think the margin is going to be the popular vote?<stop><start>I have no idea. I think it will be it will definitely be close in the popular vote. Whether it's close in the electoral vote depends on what happens there's a dozen States it could go either way. So either one of there could be a sizable electoral victory it could be<stop><start>Predict Florida for me. Predict Missouri, Pennsylvania, Michigan.<stop><start>I think Gore will win Florida, Pennsylvania, and Michigan. I've always thought Gore would win Florida. We've worked like crazy there for 8 years, and we've done a lot for Florida and a lot with Florida, and Joe Lieberman has helped a lot in Florida. So I think Gore will win Florida. I think he will win Pennsylvania. I think he will win Michigan, and I think he will win Missouri if Mrs. Carnahan is the choice of the Missouri people for Senator.<stop><start>And Washington State?<stop><start>I think we'll win in Washington.<stop><start>I don't want to take any of your money on that. Did you see the cover on Al that the Rolling Stone that's gotten so much talk?<stop><start>Yes.<stop><start>It took hours to do that interview. I just used eat up hours of his time. I appreciate your time very much.<stop><start>Thanks. August 15, 2000 2000 Democratic Convention. I'll tell you what. I was nostalgic enough, and then you had to stop at McDonald's on top of it?<stop><start>It was nice. We didn't get much sleep last night. It was a nice setting, though, today, and it was nice last night. That convention was nice. The stage seemed more in the audience than the previous ones we've had, didn't it?<stop><start>Yeah. And they were up for it, that crowd last night.<stop><start>They were ready, weren't they?<stop><start>Yeah. If I remember correctly, in '92 there was still some skepticism in that audience, when you gave your acceptance speech. But you know, the difference between then and now is pretty<stop><start>A lot of these people have been with me for 8 years now, you know. They have a lot of those delegates I've run into several people that tell me they were at the previous conventions, one or the other of them, going in<stop><start>How are you feeling right now?<stop><start>I feel fine. I'm a little tired. You know, we just all I did in L.A. was run around and try to prepare for the speech. Except I did get to play golf one day, which was quite nice.<stop><start>You did? Where?<stop><start>I played a public course there. What's it called? El Rancho? It's a public course right near Hillcrest that used to be the site of the L.A. Open. They were very proud of it. They mayor wanted to play on it. The bad thing about it was lots of folks out there. It took a good while to get around, but it was really nice. AmeriCorps<stop><start>Steve said, when he called me, that you wanted to talk a little bit more about foreign policy and<stop><start>There were some things we didn't talk and I made a few notes. I don't think we said anything last time about foreign policy. I just thought you might have some questions you wanted to ask. I also thought we didn't talk much about environmental policy. And I couldn't remember whether we talked about AmeriCorps.<stop><start>About AmeriCorps? Did we talk about AmeriCorps? No, we didn't. We don't have to.<stop><start>You know how important that is to me.<stop><start>Yeah, I know how important that is.<stop><start>Did you see what Bush said 2 days ago?<stop><start>What did he say?<stop><start>He said he was going to get rid of the 100,000 cops program, and he was going to take another look at AmeriCorps.<stop><start>Really? But so many Republicans have turned around on that. I mean, I thought that the adjustment that you announced in Philadelphia at the voluntarism summit was just the icing on the cake for that program. That really<stop><start>I think the only reason he would get rid of it is just for personal<stop><start>Did you ever hear the story about John Kasich going to Jeff Canada's program in Harlem?<stop><start>Yeah.<stop><start>And Kasich saying, "God, you know, this is the kind of thing that AmeriCorps should be." And Jeff said to him, "Every one of those kids in there are AmeriCorps kids."<stop><start>And Kasich has turned around. Foreign Policy<stop><start>Yeah, Kasich has turned around. Santorum has turned around. Let me ask about let's go to foreign policy for a minute. In going through this thing, I've now written a mere 31,000 words. Every time you have to make a decision about global economic security during the last 8 years, you make it like that. Mexico, Asia, time and time again, you seem to have a really good sense of what global economic security is about. But international security decisions seem to be tougher.<stop><start>Well, if you look at it, for one thing, if it's a decision that involves the use of force, almost without exception Haiti being the exception, I guess we have particularly in the Balkans, we thought we had to have first a consensus within NATO and then, if possible, some sanction from the United Nations. It took us a long time to put together that consensus in Bosnia. It took a couple of years.<stop><start>You were saying last time that first, especially Somalia, you hadn't that you didn't have the procedures in place that you later would.<stop><start>I think Somalia was a special case. I don't feel that way about Bosnia. Bosnia was literally Christopher went to Europe early on. We tried to build a consensus. We failed. We didn't think we should go in there unilaterally. We finally got the country to, I think, eventually we're proud of what NATO did in Bosnia and proud of the peace process. And ironically, we didn't have the kind of delay in Kosovo that I was afraid we'd have. You know, it actually worked out pretty well. So I think you're going to see this from time to time where, if there's a question on the use of force, whenever possible, the American people will want the United States to act with others. And whenever possible, it would be a good thing if we do and if it's sanctioned by the U.N. or at least if there's a darn good argument that it's covered by a U.N. resolution. But Somalia was a special case. And I hope that Somalia will never be used as an excuse for the United States not to be involved in United Nations missions. We're training those soldiers in West Africa now that are going to go into Sierra Leone, which I think is a very good thing. And we have been working, ironically, for several years on the Africa Crisis Response Initiative, trying to generally train soldiers in Africa to be ready to deal with the problems. But what happened in Somalia, as I say, was a special case because you had the Americans were there under U.N. command. And I think we learned a lot from Somalia, but I think that we shouldn't overlearn it. That is, we shouldn't refuse to go into another situation with soldiers from other countries. It's just that I think, if it happened again, we would have a much clearer notion of the rules of combat. And before we would have an engagement that could literally have led to several hundred casualties on their side and 18 deaths on our side, we would have much greater involvement in the details of it.<stop><start>I talked to McCain about your foreign policy and other things. He was actually very supportive in a lot of other areas, especially high tech areas. But the argument that he made on foreign policy is one that you hear from the foreign policy priesthood all the time about your foreign policy. They use words like "ad hoc" and "untidy" and that you move from issue to issue and there isn't the kind of sustained interest in it. He uses an example they use the example of you calling China our strategic partner, and he says Japan's our strategic partner. What do you say to the critics who say that you haven't had a sustained and coherent foreign policy?<stop><start>Well, I know they say it, but I disagree. A lot of those people didn't want us to be involved in the Balkans. They didn't think it was worth it. A lot of those people didn't think we should have gone into Haiti. They didn't think it was worth it. I think we have had a consistent policy toward China. We've had to do different things in response to developments there. I think we've had a consistent policy toward Russia, and I think that we've had basically, if you go back to some of the foreign policy speeches we gave, I think it's obvious that we've tried to meet the new security threats of the 21st century. We have tried very hard to support a united Europe. We've tried very hard to support the development of democracy in Russia and the reduction of the nuclear threat and removal of nuclear weapons from the other states of the former Soviet Union. We have tried to engage with China. We have tried to contain or reverse the North Korean nuclear threat, and we have supported a dialog between the North and the South. And I think the things that we did and the things that we refused to do in North Korea have some bearing on the ultimate decision of Kim Chong il to engage Kim Dae jung. We had an unusual and systematic outreach to our neighbors south of our border. And I regret that one of the few defeats of my administration legislative defeats that I really regret was the fast track defeat which sort of slowed up our initiative in building a free trade area in the Americas, because I think it's important. And the United States has actually paid a price for that as a lot of the South American nations have actually started doing much more business with Europe rather than the United States. But I just frankly don't agree with him. I think that what I think that if they're looking for some simple explanation of the world, a lot of them didn't agree with my outreach to Africa. A lot of them didn't agree with our designation of the global AIDS crisis as a national security threat. But I think that I don't know if you were I gave a few remarks kind of ad hoc to the NDI luncheon yesterday. I think that we should see our foreign policy and national security in terms of the traditional alliances and challenges that we have that haven't changed, even though the cold war is over, in terms of the new possibilities opened up either by the end of the cold war or the emergence of this sort of global information society and then the new security threats. And I think a lot of the security threats of the 21st century will come not from other nation states but from the enemies of the nation states. I think that you will see a convergence of terrorists, narcotraffickers, weapons merchants, and kind of religious and racial nationalists. I think you will see a lot of that. And then I think you will see a convergence of information technology in weaponry which will lead to the miniaturization of seriously dangerous weapons, both conventional and biological and chemical weapons. And I think the likelihood is that sometime in the next 10 years, people will come to think that there will be kind of cross national threats which will threaten our security as much as one particular other nation. I understand why they're all saying that. But the truth is, a lot of them didn't think I was right in Bosnia and Kosovo.<stop><start>They never disagree on the big picture stuff. I talked to Tony Lake, and I read the book that he has coming out in October. And one of the things he posits as a kind of a central principle of your years that was something different was the fact that we were more threatened by the weaknesses of other countries than their strengths. Is that something you agree with?<stop><start>Absolutely. I think the United States can be threatened more by another nation's weakness than by its strength. And I used to tell I don't know how many times I've said to our crowd over the last 8 years, when we're dealing with a country that has interests that are in conflict with ours, I would rather have a strong leader of that country than a weak leader, because a strong leader can make an agreement and keep it and is capable of kind of distancing himself from the more destructive elements in the relationship and within their societies. So I believe that. I also believe let me be more specific. We want to preserve democracy in South America. But you still need to be strong to keep Colombia from collapsing, for example. There needs to be you have to have to have a certain amount of discipline and strength to do what Museveni did in Uganda and reverse the AIDS rate the infection rate of AIDS. There has to be a certain amount of strength in the state to rebuild the public health systems which are breaking down all over the world. Laurie Garrett, who wrote "The Coming Plague" do you remember that book? She's got a new book coming out I've just seen it in galleys about the breakdown of public health systems all over the world, in the states of the former Soviet Union, in developing countries, and speculating what it might mean for us. You've got to have a strong state with some fair measure of strength to deal with the challenges of climate change, for example, a lot of these big questions. So I absolutely agree with that. I think that, to take a more traditional national security problem the continuing agony between India and Pakistan and the centrality of Kashmir to that conflict and that relationship, it would take a pretty strong Government in both countries to really come to grips with the compromises that would be required to make an agreement that would have any shot at all of putting an end to that problem and also putting an end to it as a potential trigger of nuclear exchanges.<stop><start>So, is the story of Camp David II the fact that one country was stronger than the other, and they weren't able to make compromise? You don't have to answer it if it's undiplomatic.<stop><start>Well, I think we're using no, because I understand what you mean, but I don't mean it in the same sense you do. There, Israel has land and army coherence the Palestinian state has existed in the minds of its adherents and implicit in these U.N. resolutions. So in that sense, that's a different kind of strong and weak. That is, if you don't have land, an army, and everything, maybe you have to adhere to words and ideas more, and compromise is more difficult. I don't mean it like that. I meant actually but both Arafat and Barak are strong, even though Barak didn't have a big margin in the Knesset.<stop><start>No, I was meaning it in the way that you were meaning it. I was wondering whether Arafat's coalition I mean, I've been over there, and I've seen all the various I know how good a politician he's had to be to, you know, to survive.<stop><start>My gut is that if the other three or four of those other people who will take whatever if we can affect a compromise on Jerusalem that other Arab leaders will take, he can make whatever other arrangements he wants to make. But that's different from whether the Colombians can physically recover 30 percent of their land now in the hands of narcotraffickers and terrorists or whether the Russians can actually rebuild their health care system.<stop><start>Whether the Chinese can collect taxes from Guangdong Province?<stop><start>Yes, that's right. Your fellow journalist Friedman, Tom Friedman, has written a lot of very interesting essays on this whole subject of the weakness of government as opposed to the strength of government threatening freedom and progress. You know. You've written a lot of very interesting pieces on it. I just come in contact with it over and over and over again. So it's something that I'm concerned about. Public Figures and the Public<stop><start>One thing my boss was really interested in. He's spent a lot of time in Russia David Remnick. But this had nothing to do with that. It was something that you said in the very end when we were talking last time, when we started talking about the loss of mystery and the fact that the distance between the leader and the public has evaporated during your time as President. And you were saying that you thought that was a good thing. And I understand the point that you made. Do you remember that? Do you remember? You said<stop><start>Yeah, but let me say this I would like to make two points. Number one, I think that it's a good thing if the American people, through television or through journalistic writings, have a better, deeper sense of what a person the Presidency, for example not only what we're doing but why we're doing it and how it fits into the larger scheme of things and how it fits into the pattern of our lives. And you can get enough I think what you get out of the greater exposure and a more consistent pattern of exposure is worth as what you give up in majesty.<stop><start>What you give up in majesty?<stop><start>Mystery or majesty. So I approve of that. I do not believe that the kind of invasion into public figures' private lives for the stated purpose of exploring their character but for the real purpose of destroying them for some political end is a very good thing. But I think it is unlikely to occur to the extent to which you've seen it in the last 8 years again for a long time.<stop><start>You don't think the Presidency has just changed forever because of that?<stop><start>No. For one thing, the Democrats don't have anything like the infrastructure or the stomach or the desire to do that that the Republicans do. So there will have to be an actual abuse of power in office in some way that affects the public interest. We don't the guys that make money we've got a lot of rich people to support us. They wouldn't do what Scaife did. They wouldn't waste 7 million going on 15 wild goose chases to try to run somebody down. We're just not that kind of people. We're actually interested in government, and we care more about what we do with power than power. So I think that's part of it. And I think shutting the Independent Counsel law down was part of it. Finally, when it finally was hijacked as basically the private property of the party not in the executive branch, I think its legitimacy was destroyed. So I think, if there ever comes a time again when we really need one, we'll get it, the same way we got it back in the seventies. The press and the public will say the only appropriate response is for the Attorney General to name someone or to ask the court to name someone that's clearly independent.<stop><start>Even short of those kind of spectacular, disgraceful, disgusting, awful kind of investigations, the Presidency after you the Presidency exists in people's kitchens. You've been living in our kitchens for the last 8 years.<stop><start>Part of that's television and part of that's my predisposition to work hard in an open fashion. So I don't as I said, I believe the ability to share with the public at large what you're trying to do and why and to take everybody along on the journey is worth the extra exposure in terms of the price you give up. Whatever the value of the mystery is, I think it's worth it. And I think most future Presidents will attempt to establish a more I don't know "intimate" may be the wrong word, but you know what I'm trying to say a more sort of closer bond with the American people not just on an emotional level but actually in terms of having them understand what you're trying to do and why. And if you do lots of interviews, if you're real accessful, if you work crowds, if you do townhall meetings, all these things that I did, you run the risk of making mistakes and paying some price and also sort of being demystified. But I think the benefit you get from it, in terms of keeping the energy flowing through a democratic system, is quite great. If you think about it, after the Republicans won the Congress, a lot of people thought we'd never get anything done again. But we got a big bipartisan balanced budget. We got a big bipartisan welfare reform. We got a lot of bipartisan education reforms. We've even gotten some environmental work done. We got the Safe Drinking Water Act, we got Conservation and Environment<stop><start>An awful lot of public land. I mean, I've been through these budgets line by line over the last 3 or 4 months.<stop><start>I worked with Pete Domenici and I worked together to do this Baca Ranch deal in New Mexico. It's a huge thing. And we may actually get this whole CARA legislation through where we're really trying to make the right kind of compromises with the Republicans that would, in effect, take the royalties we get from offshore drilling and put it only into environmental preservation, buying land a small part of it for the Federal Government but a lot of it for States and then restoration of coastlines and all that kind of stuff. If this thing passes, it's huge. What do you think the odds are we can pass this CARA legislation? It's a really big thing. Chief of Staff John Podesta. It's up against some tough rightwing filibusters.<stop><start>Is this last round of negotiations going to happen during the next 2 or 3 weeks?<stop><start>On the environmental stuff?<stop><start>No, I mean the budget. Is that in the budget?<stop><start>No, it's a separate it's a stand alone bill, because it takes a funding stream that's already there and directs it only to basically long term land preservation and conservation work at the State and local level, primarily, and the Federal level. But the fact that some of these Republicans, including Don Young from Alaska, they're willing to work with us to institutionalize this sort of thing on a permanent basis is, I think, really encouraging. I still believe there's a lot to be said for showing up every day, and you just keep trying to push the rock up the hill. Reaction to Scandal<stop><start>Can I say something that might piss you off? And you can even turn that off if you want. Deputy Press Secretary Jake Siewert. We're landing. You just don't have to answer it.<stop><start>When Lewinski happened, I was more pissed off at my colleagues and at the Republicans than I was at you. I'm sitting there, writing this piece, and I go through this whole section of the trench warfare, line by line battles that you've won against the Republicans during those 3 or 4 years. And all of a sudden, I get to Lewinski, and I got to say, I got pissed off at you. It doesn't change the bottom line of the piece<stop><start>I was pissed off at me.<stop><start>I was surprised. I was surprised by my own reaction to that moment because the stuff you had done you didn't get any credit for, you weren't going to get any credit for. Unless a lot of people read this piece and it changes other people's minds, you wouldn't get credit for it. But it was the stuff that you did for working people. You're probably the best President for the working people in the history of the country. And then<stop><start>Robert Pear actually wrote a good story the other day about what we had done for the working poor that nobody noticed over 8 years. That's why we were able to get it done. But I think well, you know, for us to talk about that would require a longer conversation than we have. But I think the interesting thing was, I viewed the way they overreacted to it as sort of like the last as the second step of the kind of purging our national life of the hardcore, rightwing aspects of the Gingrich revolution, which was the Government shutdown. We rolled that back, and then we rolled this back, and then we had this unbelievable congressional election. And I think you see it in the tone and tenor of the Republican campaign this year. Although I told you before, I'm not sure their policies have changed very much, but at least in the tone and tenor of it, I think you can see basically a decision within their camp that, "Okay," that, you know, "we don't have to get beat a third time over this. We want to stay in."<stop><start>I think we've changed, too. A little bit late for your benefit.<stop><start>Yes, I think so.<stop><start>But I think that Bush is getting a little bit of the benefit of the fact<stop><start>Huge.<stop><start>that we've realized that my colleagues realize that we went way overboard in '98. I mean, our poll ratings yours<stop><start>But I think it was even before that. I don't think well, sometime we'll have more time to talk about it. But I hope that nobody will ever have to undergo what I did from 1991 through 1998 again, or at least, I hope that if it happens, the media will know that it's happened, instead of being so willing to be basically suborned by it and kind of enlisted and all these other things that happened. In fact, if that is one result of it and it changes our politics and makes it a little less hostile and personally destructive, even if the changes last for 10 or 15 years, that would be a very good thing. I can't say that I think it would have been worth it, but it certainly would be a very good thing. President's Best Memories<stop><start>Let's end on an up. I don't want to end on that note. What's your favorite moment when you look back? What was your biggest high?<stop><start>Well, it's very difficult to say because we did so many things, and one of the things that that I'm sitting here with you now. We just left the handoff deal, and I'm thinking what I mean, it seems like I just got inaugurated the first time. I can't believe that 8 years are gone. But I knew, when we won the economic plan, that it would turn the country around economically. I felt that when we passed AmeriCorps we had a chance to create a new citizen ethic in the country, which I thought was important. I loved going to Ireland when we made the peace there. I loved a lot of the things we did in the Middle East meant a lot to me. You know, when we just a lot of things. I feel very strongly that we did the right thing with welfare reform. I think I told you, when I was at the trial lawyers' meeting the other day and I was just shaking hands, I met two women. One had a master's degree, and one had a law degree. They told me they were on welfare when I became President. I went home I say I went home I went back to my political home in New Hampshire earlier this year on the eighth anniversary of my victory in the New Hampshire primary, and I met a woman in the crowd who was a nurse who had gotten some appointment from our administration and was on welfare when I got elected President. I suppose, in a funny way, those personal encounters are the biggest highs I get. There was a guy I don't know if you were out there when I spoke today and introduced Al and I started talking about the HOPE scholarship? There was a guy over to my left that said, "Yeah, I got one of those here." He screamed out in the audience. Because I said it would pay for the community college there. He said, "Yeah, I know. I'm there. I got one." You know, I run into people all the time that have taken the family leave law. I met a woman the other day who told me that her sister had taken the family leave law to take care of their mother, and then she had gotten cancer and taken it and now had a clean bill of health. And I think that in some ways, even bigger than all the 100,000 people in the street in Dublin and all of the huge emotional crowd events, when you actually look at somebody who says, here is something you did, and my life is better because of it, that's probably the most rewarding thing of all.<stop><start>Well, it was 9 years ago just about now that it was just you and me and a State trooper in Maine. And it does feel like<stop><start>Maine?<stop><start>The State trooper was a source for the American<stop><start>We also got beat in Maine. Jerry Brown won in Maine. Remember that?<stop><start>I was thinking about that out there today. I was just thinking about the first time I went out with you in Maine. And I remember we were stuck on the tarmac in Boston. You had to catch a plane to Chicago. And I looked at you, and I said, "Do you realize a year from today you could be giving your acceptance speech, and you'll have a fleet of cars and Secret Service and planes to take you anywhere you want to go?" And you looked at me as if to say, you're out of your mind, boy.<stop><start>And now it's all over or just beginning. A new chapter is beginning. I've got to figure out after you write this, you ought to talk to me about what you think I ought to do next. President's Future Plans<stop><start>I have a couple of ideas. I know a guy, the guy who runs the Ford Foundation in Asia is really interested in funding ways to move new technology and biotechnology to Third World areas. He would give you a bunch of money for your collaborating on that.<stop><start>Well, I'm going to spend a lot of time working on that.<stop><start>My guess is that, just from hearing you talk, that's the kind of stuff that floats your boat these days.<stop><start>Oh, yeah. Yeah, I want to do stuff that keeps my juices running.<stop><start>I don't think you're going to have any problem with that.<stop><start>No. I'm going to have a good time. But I've got to if my wife wins the Senate seat and my daughter stays in school, I have to make a sizeable income. Laughter<stop><start>One or two speeches a month. But we've still got to play golf next year.<stop><start>You've got a deal. We can also play this year, if you want to come.<stop><start>By the way, I broke 90 for the first time between last interview and this.<stop><start>That's great.<stop><start>Two birdies.<stop><start>Two?<stop><start>That meant I screwed up some other holes.<stop><start>That's great. If you want to come to Washington and play, I'd like that. July 05, 2000 President's Historical Perspective<stop><start>Do you essentially agree with my sense that you had that the big issue has been moving from the industrial age to the information age, and that I mean, the toughest thing<stop><start>Yes. The short answer to that is yes.<stop><start>to explain to people is, you take something like how can being in favor of affirmative action and being in favor of welfare reform be part of the same vision? How can being in favor of free trade and being in favor of universal health insurance be part of the same vision? There are people on the right or the left who would say, "You can't do that." And yet, I think that they are part of the same vision. But my first question is, how would you describe that vision?<stop><start>I think my view I saw my Presidency as a transformational period, and basically, America has gone through two before. Maybe it could start if we did it in historical times. There were basically I look at American history in the following we had the creation how we got started and sort of filling out the elements of the National Government and defining what it meant. And that basically went from the Declaration of Independence to the Constitution, Washington's Presidency, and the appointment of John Marshall as Chief Justice which is a very important thing and then, ironically, through Jefferson's Presidency, with the purchase of Louisiana and the Lewis and Clark expedition, and then the next big challenge was, how would we adapt that to our growing industrialization? And how did we get rid of slavery, which was inconsistent with our principles? So obviously, that's what Lincoln and the Civil War and the constitutional amendments and everything that happened on civil rights after that was about slavery. But there was no single President that managed the process, if you will, or laid out a framework from the agricultural society to an industrial society. But that's part of what the railroads, the canals was all about, and it's part of what and Lincoln was a part of that with the Morrill Land Grant Act, with the colleges.<stop><start>This happened too slowly for<stop><start>But it happened over a long period of time. Then, there was the transformation from the you know, it happened over a long period of time as we slowly became a balanced society. But then, when we burst onto the world scene as a major national industrial power, that process was basically defined by Theodore Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson. And I sort of saw this period in parallel with that. The rest of the 20th century was mostly about dealing with the rise of first, the Great Depression then the war and the need to defeat totalitarian systems, which was part of the war and the cold war and dealing with the specific challenges at home, principally civil rights, the women's movement, and the growth of environmental movement in America. So here, we are moving into, basically, from an industrial society an industrial economy to an information economy, and at the same time moving into an ever more globalized economy, which also is more and more of a global society in that we share common challenges and common interests that go beyond economics. And the globalization of the media has accelerated that. So I saw my challenges trying to, first of all, maximize America's presence in the information economy second, to try to maximize our influence in the welfare of our country and likeminded people around the world in a globalized society. And then, the other and I'll get to your questions and then the third big thing for me was trying to make people have a broader and deeper vision of the American community and how to handle diversity and how we would finally get a chance to see, in ways we never had before, what it meant to make one out of many, what our national motto meant. And I think the and you ask me, well, how can you reconcile those things? It seems to me that the two operational strategies we had to pursue those three great goals were, one, the Third Way political and social philosophy. If you believe in opportunity and responsibility and community, then it's perfectly clear why you would be for affirmative action and a global trading system, you know, why you would be for health care for everybody and whatever else you said what was the other thing?<stop><start>Free trade. No, I said that.<stop><start>Welfare reform.<stop><start>Welfare reform.<stop><start>Welfare reform, because first of all, work is the best social program. Secondly, it is imperative to have a basic work ethic if you believe in individual responsibility and you believe it gives meaning and direction to life, and I do. But if you do, you also recognize that there is no society no society has succeeded in providing access to health care to everybody without some governmental action.<stop><start>But there have been people all along, as you know I mean, you and I had this same conversation in 1991. People all along said, "This is just an electoral strategy. It isn't a Government strategy."<stop><start>It was never just an electoral strategy to me.<stop><start>Well, me, neither, as you know. And the question I guess my question is, do you feel that you were ever able to really communicate the depth and breadth of this to the public?<stop><start>Yes, but only probably only at the State of the Union Addresses, because it's probably the only time I ever got to say it unfiltered. If I made an error in those, even though they always received very high public approval ratings, they said it always took me so much time to explain my specific ideas in education or whatever, I'm not sure I ever took full advantage of the opportunity to lay the coherent philosophy out because I do think at those points, that people got it. But what I was going to tell you, if I could go back I think we had the transformation from the industrial economy to the information economy, from the idea of a national society to an idea of a more global society in which nation states matter. I think the nation state will matter more in some ways in the 21st century. We can talk about that some. And thirdly, the whole idea of defining America where our diversity was something to be cherished and celebrated because because our common humanity and common values were more important. And then, operationally, I think, the two things I think that mattered, I made some the whole Third Way political and social philosophy, one and second is sort of a relentless focus on the future, making people always trying to force people to always think about not only what we're doing, how does it affect today, but what's it going to be like 5 years from now, 10 years from now, 20 years from now? And I think that is often that hasn't often been the business of the Government. But if you go back to Roosevelt's focus on conservation or Wilson's struggle of failed attempt at the League of Nations, I think what made them both great Presidents for the transformational period America was in is that they were not only successful in the moment, by and large, but they had this focus on the future they kept trying to spark the public imagination with the future. And that's I hope very much that the announcement of this genome project, although I think it fills people with foreboding as well as hope, will tend to spark future orientation on the part of the voters, so the issues that are plainly before us, but won't be felt for a few years will have more effect on the debate and also on people's voting rights. Trade<stop><start>But it's a difficult thing. Charlene Barshefsky said to me that there are times that you've really been concerned, that the expression you used was that you hadn't found your voice on trade, which is the equivalent of<stop><start>Well, one of the things she, of course, has to deal with it. But the two things in trade that have frustrated me most, although I think we've got a great record and you can go from NAFTA to the WTO, to the Africa CBI, to launching the free trade of the Americas to China.<stop><start>The reason I raised it was because what you just said about the genome reminded me I just read your remarks about NAFTA in October '93, and it was very similar, too.<stop><start>Yes. And then, of course, China, and then in between we had 270 odd agreements, and we had the Mexican financial crisis and the Asian financial crisis. But the thing that bothered me about trade the two things that have bothered me about trade, I think, are One, I have so far not created a consensus within my own party, at least among the elected officials, for the view of trade which I hold. And two and I think it's genuine that is, I don't think this is just politics. I think it's how people view the world the second thing, and closely related to that, is that I went to Geneva twice, and I went to Davos once, and then I went out to Seattle to try to make the case that you can't have a global trading system apart from a global social conscience, anyway, where there is a legitimate place for the voices of those who care about the rights of workers, the condition of children in the workplace, the impact of economic development on the environment, both nationally and globally. I haven't yet, at least, been able to convince people that there is a synthesizing vision here that has to drive not only a global trading system but these other initiatives as well. And I suppose I shouldn't be surprised, because it's a fairly new debate. And one of the great things that always struck me is, if you look at the people who were demonstrating in Seattle, while I think they were all sincere that is, they believed in what they were demonstrating against their sense of solidarity was truly ironic, because they had completely conflicting positions.<stop><start>What?<stop><start>I mean, for example, a lot of the labor union people that demonstrated believe that even though for example, they think that even though this China deal is a shortterm benefit to American industry because China drops their barriers, that they're so big that there will be so much investment there that they will develop a great deal of industrial capacity and that wage levels will be so low that it will cost the developed world, and particularly America because our markets are more open than the Europeans, a lot of our industrial base within a fairly short term. And that's what they really believe. I don't believe that, but that's what they believe. And then you have the people that are demonstrating on behalf of the Third World, and they believe our concern for labor and the environment is a protectionist ruse to protect American high wage jobs. But they're all out there in the streets in Seattle demonstrating together, because they're genuinely frustrated about the way the world is going and they kind of don't like this whole globalization thing. They think it's going to lead to further loss of control by ordinary people over the basic circumstances of their lives, and that bothers them.<stop><start>I think that this is to kind of put a cap on the first question I mean, that's so much at the heart of what you've been trying to overcome. I was talked to Zoe Baird, who said that she always remembers the statistics that you used, I think in around '95, that more jobs had been created by companies owned by women than had been lost by Fortune 500 companies. You always tried to make the future less frightened for folks. And yet, I'm not sure you're convinced that you made the case.<stop><start>Well, I think I made the case to the people that were open to it, but I believe that I think that it's hard. Everybody's for change in general, but normally against it in particular. You know, what's that Dick Riley used to say? "Let's all change. You go first." Laughter That's his sort of formulation of it. It shouldn't be surprising. But I still believe, first of all, I think that what I said to the American people is true and right. Secondly, I don't think there is any alternative to change. So I think the real question is, how do you bring your, basically, values that don't change how do you translate them into specific approaches and policies that have the greatest chance of enhancing those values in the world you're going to live in? That's the way I look at this. And I think that for the United States to have essentially turned away from this world, I think, would have been a terrible mistake. And in fact, I think the only mistake we've made in this whole thing is not accelerating the integration of the free trade area of the Americas more more rapid. Deficit Reduction<stop><start>Let me ask you some specific questions. Let's take a walk start in '93. The First Lady said to me the other day that she believed that deficit reduction was a predicate for doing all the rest of the stuff.<stop><start>Absolutely.<stop><start>She compared it to education in Arkansas when you were reelected.<stop><start>The '93 economic plan made all the rest of this possible.<stop><start>There were a fair number of people on your staff that were saying, you know, it would throw the economy into recession. And you were dealing it was a theory at that point that if you lowered the deficit, interest rates would come down, and you would achieve the kind of growth that you have achieved. I mean, what made you think that<stop><start>First of all, let me back up a little bit. The people on the staff who favored somewhat there was nobody on my staff that was against vigorous deficit reduction. There were some who were afraid that to make the decisions we would have to make to get the 500 billion, which is what Lloyd Bentsen and Bob Rubin felt was sort of the magic psychological threshold we had to cross to get the bond markets and the stock market to respond in an appropriate way, they were afraid that if we did that, we would have to shelve too much of our progressive commitments in the campaign. Now, what finally happened was, we came up with a plan that raised income taxes only on the top 1.2 percent of the people, which I had, after all, promised to do in the '92 campaign. It wasn't like I didn't tell upper income people who supported me I wouldn't try to raise their taxes. But we had to raise them at the very end. Bentsen came in with a plan that essentially lifted the income cap off the Medicare taxes, which closed the gap. And we stuck with the gas tax, which Charlie Stenholm and some of our conservatives who were big deficit hawks were worried about, because they were afraid it would make our guys vulnerable, and I think it did. It was the only thing that average people had to pay, except that there were, I think, 13 percent of the Social Security recipients paid more because we began to tax Social Security income more like regular pension income. But it was the Republicans who believed that tax increases by definition were recessionary and that so they unanimously opposed the plan. You asked me what convinced me. What convinced me finally was that I believe fundamentally, unless we got interest rates down and investment flowing, that we would never be able to see a decline in unemployment and growth in new businesses, particularly in this high tech sector which depended on vast flows of venture capital, confidence capital, if you will, that it seemed to me was just out there bursting, waiting to happen. I think and maybe it was my experience as a Governor that informed all this but I really did believe there was this huge, vast, pent up potential in the American economy that had been artificially repressed ever since the deficit spending recovery at the end of President Reagan's first term. Basically, what happened at the end of the first Reagan term is, interest rates weren't too high because we had such a terrible recession and so much inflation and such high interest rates at the end of President Carter's term, so when the interest rates came down, then inflation naturally inflation around the world came down. Those huge deficits brought us back a little bit. But the long term potential of the American economy, I was convinced, could never be unleashed until we got rid of the deficit. So finally, I just decided that if I didn't get the economy going, nothing else would matter in the end, and I believed that the pent up potential of the American economy was so great, that if we did get the interest rates down and we did get investment up, everything else would fall into place. And I thought that I ought to listen to Bentsen and Rubin because they knew a lot more about it than I did. Earned Income Tax Credit<stop><start>But you didn't listen to Bentsen on the EITC. That was one place where you absolutely didn't bend at all.<stop><start>No, but we had promised that, and I believed in it. I thought and again, I'm confident that not only what I saw in the campaign but my experience as Governor of a State that was always in the bottom two or three in per capita income had an impact on this. But I just believe that we had to use the tax system to dignify the work of low wage workers and to make it possible for them to raise their children more successfully. I didn't think I could go out there and argue for a tough welfare reform bill and a tough deficit reduction package, and say I was going to have to slow down my increases in education spending and some other social spending, housing, and all these other things that I would otherwise like to do if we weren't prepared to give lower income working people more income. I also thought it was good economics, because they were going to spend it. They needed to spend it. Congress and Taxes<stop><start>Did you ever think that was there any way that you could have gotten Republicans to go along with this?<stop><start>I don't know, and I'll tell you why. In retrospect, maybe there were some things I could have done.<stop><start>What if you had invited Dole and Michel to that dinner in Little Rock?<stop><start>Yes, or invited them down even on their own it might have worked. The real problem I see with it in retrospect, the reason I say I don't know first of all I wish I had done that, because later on I started bending over backwards. I had Gingrich in and Armey in, and I met with them exhaustively, and I tried. Often it didn't work, but we did get some things done from time to time. I think they had made a decision to oppose all tax increases because of the Gingrich position vis a vis President Bush. And he was pretty well in the ideological saddle, the political saddle in the House then. And I think because Senator Dole obviously hoped to run for President in '96, I think the Republicans in the Senate were going to be reluctant to break ranks once it was obvious that the House Republicans were going to oppose any kind of deficit reduction package that had any tax increases in it. And I didn't believe if we hadn't gone for some upper income tax increases, then number one, we would have had to adopt cuts that the Democratic majority in the House would not have supported, even under me. And number two, we could not have kept our commitments on the earned income tax credits on education, where we did have a substantial increase, or on the empowerment zones or a lot of the other things I did that I believed in. Washington Politics<stop><start>Did the atmosphere surprise you, the vitriol, the difficulty?<stop><start>Yes, it did, I think, basically, but I now know things I didn't know then.<stop><start>What do you know now?<stop><start>Well, they really believed first, I know now something I didn't know, which is that some of the people on the Republican side actually, I did know this, but I didn't believe it when I got a call from the White House early before I decided to run in the summer of 1990 from a guy I knew who worked there who was saying, "You know, you shouldn't run." Bush was at like 80 percent then or something. I couldn't believe so I had this serious talk with him about how President Bush had used his popularity to try to deal with the economy. And after about 5 minutes, the guy said, "Now, let's just cut the crap. We've looked at this crowd, and we can beat them all. All the guys in Congress have votes. We can beat them all. And we think Governor Cuomo's too liberal, but you're different. You might beat us, and so if you run, we're going to take you out early." Then I realized that they somehow thought it was serious. Then, after I got up here and started dealing with them, what I realized is that they had been in for 12 years, but they basically had been in since President Nixon won, except for the Carter interregnum, which they thought was purely a function of Watergate, and therefore they saw it as an historical accident that they had quickly corrected, and that's the way they saw it. I actually think Jimmy Carter and, before him, Bobby Kennedy were the precursors of the sort of New Democrat, Third Way stuff I've tried to do here. And I think, therefore, it's not fair, but that exactly, to diminish but that's the way they viewed it, anyway. So I think they believed that there would never be another Democratic President. I really think a lot of them thought they could hold the White House forever, until a third party came along to basically offer a competing vision. And so, they just never saw me as a legitimate person. They just thought I was, in President Bush's words, the Governor of a small southern State. And as I often crack on the trail, I was so naive that I actually thought that was a compliment. Laughter And I still do. So anyway, it did surprise me. I mean, I knew it was there, and I'd seen the Democrats do things in my view, I guess I've got a warped view, but I never thought it was nearly as bad as what they did to me. But from time to time, the Democrats did things I didn't approve of. I didn't like the nature of their arguments against John Tower or the fact that somebody checked out the movies that Bob Bork and I knew there was some of this up here. But I never thought I would see it in the kind of systematic way that I saw it unfold. But when I got to know Newt Gingrich and actually had a lot of candid conversations with him, I realized that that's just the way they thought politics worked.<stop><start>War without blood.<stop><start>Yes, that's what they thought.<stop><start>That's what Newt called it.<stop><start>I had a fascinating conversation with one Republican Senator in the middle of the D'Amato hearings when they were impugning Hillary. And I asked this guy, who was pretty candid, I said, "Do you really think that my wife or I did anything wrong in this Whitewater thing? Not illegal, even wrong?" And he just started laughing. He said, "Oh, you've got to be kidding." He said, "Any fool who has read the record would know you didn't do anything wrong." He said, "How could you do anything wrong? You didn't borrow any money from the S L which failed. It was a very small S L failure. And you lost 40,000 or whatever you lost on the real estate deal." He said, "Of course, you didn't do anything wrong." He said, "That's not the point of this. The point of this is to make people think you did something wrong." But so, it was funny. Yes, I was surprised by their vitriol, and yes, I was surprised, and I must say I was surprised that they believed and they had an electoral and they turned out to be right, but I made a mistake or two that helped them. They believed that they could win the Congress if they could just say no to everything, and they did. And I think it rested on basically three things. One is, we did the economy, the budget plan, which we had to do, and we had to expect some loss of midterm seats. And some of those seats we had for a long, long time were naturally Republican seats, anyway. So that was the first thing. The second thing is but the people hadn't felt the benefits of it. Then the second thing we did that cost us some seats, but I am absolutely convinced is the right thing to do, was the Brady bill and the crime bill, which had the assault weapons ban. But there again, we got that done in 1994. Had it happened in '93, I think it would not have hurt us so bad. But in '94 there wasn't enough time, between the time that bill passed and the time people voted to convince the world people that voted, against our Congressmen on the Brady bill and the assault weapons ban that there wasn't anything going to happen to them and their hunting and sport shooting and all that. By '96, the issue was working for us, because I could go to places like New Hampshire and say, "I want everybody that missed a day in the deer woods to vote against me. But if you didn't, they didn't tell you the truth, and you ought to get even." That's what I said. And our winning margin in New Hampshire went from one point to 13 points or something. But in '94 my party's Members bore the brunt of that. Then the third problem we had, and this is where I think you were right, is I was trying so hard to keep all of my campaign commitments and the way I made them I should have done welfare reform before health care. You were right about that.<stop><start>I don't know that I took that position. In fact<stop><start>I thought you were saying that.<stop><start>Well, I might have said it, but<stop><start>And it was right. Welfare Reform<stop><start>I'll tell you where I was wrong, is that when it came to doing welfare reform, I chickened out, and I wrote a column the week you signed it telling you not to sign it. I talked to Elwood last week, and he's turned around on it as well. We were both wrong.<stop><start>But the reason is, I think, if you go back, there's one thing that nobody in the press has picked up and we ought to talk about this later is why I vetoed the first two bills and signed the third one. We'll come back to that. But if I hadn't done welfare reform first, that would have given the Democrats a chance to appeal to more conservative and moderate voters. And the system one thing I've learned is, since I've been there, is actually the system is capable of great change, but it can only digest so much at once. So in '93, they did a big economic plan and NAFTA, and in '94 they did this big crime bill. And they might have been able to do welfare reform, but there's no way the system could digest the health care thing. Either that, or if we were going to do health care first, then the mistake I made was saying I would veto anything short of 100 percent coverage, because<stop><start>Why did you say that?<stop><start>it was one of those decisions we made practicing for the State of the Union, and I just shouldn't have done it. It was a mistake. I was trying to bring clarity to the debate, and I was afraid that they would try to run something bogus by. Health Care Reform<stop><start>You're saying that you think there is no way you could have gotten a health insurance deal in '94?<stop><start>No.<stop><start>You don't think so?<stop><start>No.<stop><start>What about<stop><start>Let me tell you what happened.<stop><start>What if you had gone and just dumped your bill and gone over to Chafee's press conference and said, "I'm with him"?<stop><start>Well, maybe, but<stop><start>He had universality. He had a tax increase to pay for it, and he had Bob Dole.<stop><start>Well, he sort of did, but let me tell you what happened. What happened was, I offered and Hillary offered not to submit a bill. We offered to do two different things. We offered to submit sort of a generic bill and let Congress fill in the blanks, and Rostenkowski asked us this is a little more detail, but then we offered not to submit our own bill at all but instead to submit a joint bill with Dole, which I thought was good politics for him, because then he couldn't lose anything<stop><start>What was the timeframe for this? When did you make that<stop><start>Well, before we introduced a bill. I can't remember exactly when.<stop><start>So this is while the task force was<stop><start>Yes, before we introduced the bill. And Dole said to me I'll never forget this, because we were at a leadership meeting in the Cabinet Room, and he said, "No." He said, "That's not the way we should do it." He said, "You introduce a bill. We'll introduce a bill. Then we'll get together. We'll put them together. We'll compromise and pass them." Then after that, Dole got the memo from Bill Kristol, I think, which said which basically took the Gingrich line. "The way you guys are going to win in the Congress and weaken them is to have nothing happen. If anything happens, the Democrats will get credit for it, so you guys have to make sure nothing happens." After that, I don't think we really had a chance, because Mitchell killed himself to try to figure out a way to get to Chafee, do something and maybe if I had gone to Chafee's press conference, maybe that would have worked.<stop><start>Or if the First Lady had.<stop><start>You know, I hadn't thought of that, but all I can tell you is that I really believed, because Dole with that single exception, all my other dealings with Dole, whatever he said was the way we did it. In other words, not the way we did it, but I mean, if I made a deal with him, it always was honest.<stop><start>He was as good as his word.<stop><start>Exactly. And in this case, I just think, you know, he saw a chance to win the majority, saw a chance to get elected President. Bill Kristol told them don't do it they didn't do it. And that's what I think happened.<stop><start>But this is the thing that people on the left point to, that would have been your big achievement, the big, New Deal kind of achievement. And when you look back on it, do you regret the substance of what you did? Do you think that going with an employer mandate was the wrong thing? And also, do you regret the detail in which you did it, the fact that you did the 1,300 pages and<stop><start>I think politically it was bad politics. On the substance, I think basically it was a privately financed plan that relied on managed care but had a Patients' Bill of Rights in it. And I think the two things that made it unpalatable to Republicans were the employer mandate and the Patients' Bill of Rights. I think the thing that made it unpalatable to Democrats, a few of them, was the employer mandate. But if you're not going to have an employer mandate, then you have to have a subsidy where people buy into either Medicare or Medicaid. And probably, that would have been simpler.<stop><start>That's what you're going to have eventually.<stop><start>That's what you're going to have eventually. And if I could do it now, that's what I would offer. But the problem is, I couldn't do it in '94, with the deficits the way they were, without a tax increase. And I didn't feel that I could ask the Congress to vote for another tax increase, even if it was a dedicated thing, after we had just had that big one in '93.<stop><start>Plus the reporting was way out of whack at that point, because you weren't getting credit for the savings, the managed care<stop><start>We were getting killed by the scoring. The scoring was all wrong, and we knew it was wrong, but I was stuck with the scoring. So if you look at it, the position I was in is, I was stuck with the scoring. I didn't want to ask for another tax increase I didn't think that was right. So I had to try stay with the private insurance system. And I would have thought that the insurers would actually have liked that, because they were going to get a lot more customers. But basically, they didn't like it because we couldn't just let them have all those mandated customers and have no Patients' Bill of Rights and no restrictions on managed care, so they then developed this whole argument that it's a Rube Goldberg machine, it's a Government takeover of health care, and all this stuff. And that sort of stuck because they had all that money to put behind it. But the truth is, in defense of what we offered, if you go back and look at all the early soundings from all the experts when we first laid it out there, everybody said, "This is a moderate plan. This is not too far left. They've tried to keep their private insurance system. They've certainly left the private health care delivery system intact." Because nobody said it was some big Government takeover until all the people spent whatever they spent, 100 million, 200 million, whatever they spent in there later, to try to perform reverse plastic surgery on it. But I think that in the context you ask the questions, to go back, I think that the combined impact of the economic plan, with people not fully feeling the benefits in '94 the gun deal, where people had their fears fully allayed and the health care thing, where the people that wanted it didn't get it and the people that didn't like it knew what they didn't like about it. That tended to depress the Democratic voters. And the three things together produced plus the fact that the Republicans had this contract on America, and people didn't really know what it was they just knew they had a plan gave them the big win they got.<stop><start>Just to stay with health insurance for a minute, do you regret structurally the way you went about doing it? If you had to do it all over again, would you give it to the First Lady? Was that a mistake?<stop><start>I don't think it was a mistake to give it to her. I think the mistake I made was, I either should have insisted on having her say, "Okay, here's all of our work. Look at it. Here are the basic principles we want. You guys draft the bill," or I would have insisted that we had a joint bill. If we were going to draft the bill, I would have made the Republicans draft it with me. That was the mistake I made. Neither one of those things was her doing. She gets a total bum rap on this. The plan she came up with, which was she was told, "We ain't going to have a tax increase, right, and therefore it's not going to be a total Government program, but you have to try to get 100 percent coverage," so there was no other way to do it except with an employer mandate. And she was also told that "managed care is going to happen, and we favor it," which she did favor it, "but we've got to have some protections in there for people." I don't know how many doctors I've had come up to me since then, tell me that we were right and that basically it was a good plan. So in a way, I think she really got a bum rap on that deal, because she was operating within constraints that were, we now know, impossible. What I should have done is to let her do all the work, publish all the findings, say, "Here are our principles. You guys write the bill." Or I should have said, "If you want me to do a bill, I will only do it if we have a bipartisan agreement on the bill." That would have produced something less than 100 percent of coverage, but at least it would have produced something that would have passed and gotten us up to 90 or maybe above 90 percent. That was the mistake I made. But it was my mistake, not hers. She, I think, has gotten a totally bum rap on this deal. All she did was what she was asked to do.<stop><start>I asked Ira about it, and he pointed to his E commerce protocols, and he said, "What I did was, I decided to do everything the exact opposite of what we did with health insurance, and it worked."<stop><start>But the interesting thing there was, it worked because number one, we didn't have to pass a big bill because of the Telecommunications Act, which was a great success which we ought to talk about later was a big part of the economic program, was operating on a parallel track. And all we had to do there was to basically invite them to help us make Government policy that would maximize economic growth. It was a much simpler problem. There was absolutely no way to get to 100 percent of coverage, to have universal health coverage, unless you had an employer mandate or the Government filled in the difference. If we were doing it today, we could do it. And the next administration could do it, because now we have the money to do it. But then, we didn't.<stop><start>You're going to come down closer to get what you want in reconciliation if you move the CHIPS program to cover the parents, and only<stop><start>The CHIPS program, the parents, and you let people between 55 and 65 buy into Medicare. Then the only people that won't be able to get health insurance are young, single people who think they'll live forever and just don't want to do it, or very wealthy people who just would rather go ahead and just pay their doctor.<stop><start>The reason why I was always for universal was because I thought those people had a moral responsibility to pay in to help the risk pools.<stop><start>I don't know if I can get this CHIPS thing, but if I can, it will make a huge difference. White House Operations Gays in the Military<stop><start>I don't want to stick on the bad stuff in the first term too long, but things in retrospect, things seemed pretty much a mess in the White House for the first couple of years. And there were times several people have said to me that you came to them at various times and said, "Look, I'm in the wrong position. I'm to the left of where I should be," or "Things just don't feel right," or "Things are out of control." And I guess two or three questions you could answer in a bunch How did that happen? I mean, how do you come out of the box doing gays in the military, for example, which I assume well, you believe in the policy it probably wasn't the best thing to come out of the box with. Why did you surround yourself with why were there so few At this point, a portion of the interview was missing from the transcript released by the Office of the Press Secretary.<stop><start>At what point did you get a White House that you were really happy with the way it was working?<stop><start>Well, first of all, I think that in retrospect, I think if you compare the functioning of our White House, for example, with the Reagan White House in the first term, I think ours looks pretty good. And I think that the problems we had were fundamentally most of the mistakes we made were political, not substantive. I mean, Bruce Reed was there Sperling was there McLarty was there and Rubin was there. So I don't think I don't think it's fair to say and Laura Tyson agreed with us. I don't think we had a bad I think we did have people who were, philosophically and substantively and on policy terms, consistent with our New Democrat philosophy. And I think that budget, from the empowerment zones to the charter schools we got in the beginning, to the Goals 2000 program, to what we did on the student loan program which was terrific it saved 8 billion in student loan costs for kids to the overall economic plan, I think it was consistent. I think the economic plan was consistent I mean, the crime bill was completely New Democrat. I think family leave and the Brady bill were. A lot of the most important things that were done that made possible all the stuff we've done in the last 4 years<stop><start>You left out NAFTA and reinventing Government.<stop><start>Yes, we had NAFTA, and we did RIGO, and we did the WTO all that in the first 2 years.<stop><start>But even given all that<stop><start>But what was wrong was that the political image was different from the reality. The substantive reality, I think, was quite good. I've heard Bob Rubin defend the White House repeatedly and talk about how the things that worked well later, especially the sense of camaraderie and teamwork and joint decisionmaking, were all put in place in that first year and a half. But let's just go through the problems, and you'll see. Part of it was, I think, none of us were sensitive to the way sufficiently sensitive to the way Washington works and to the way little things would look big to other people. Now, let's just start with the gays in the military. How did that happen? It is not true that we brought it up first.<stop><start>Andrea Mitchell brought it up in a press conference on November 11th.<stop><start>Yes, but why? What happened? Dole introduced legislation Dole deserves credit for this. The Republicans should give Dole credit for this. They always say he was too moderate and all that. They should give Dole credit for this. And I give him credit for it. I've thought a lot of times about how I could have outmaneuvered him on it. But I had two things going and the Joint Chiefs obviously agreed with him, which helped. But what put this on the front burner early? Not me it wasn't my decision. Dole introduced a bill in Congress which was going to fly through there, because Nunn agreed with him, to keep the present policy. That was like the first thing he did. And then the Joint Chiefs demanded a meeting with me. The President can't refuse to meet with the Joint Chiefs. So it was those two things that put this thing front and center. I did not want this<stop><start>The bill came in after you said after Andrea Mitchell asked the question and you responded the way you did. I always thought that was because she needed a vacation and hadn't taken it.<stop><start>No, no, it was because but he was going to put that in anyway. We knew what he was doing. So what happened was, between the Joint Chiefs and the Dole bill, we were forced to put it up. I was going what I intended to do was to get all the stuff, my basic stuff organized, lead with that, and figure out how to handle the gays in the military. And they basically forced me to deal with it from the beginning. And then the thing that then I got a lot of heat, obviously, from the gay community for what I did. But everybody ignores what precipitated "don't ask, don't tell," which was a vote in the Senate, essentially on the Dole position, that passed 68 32, i.e. by a veto proof margin. There was no vote in the House. In retrospect, given the way Washington works, what I probably should have done is issued a clean Executive order, let them overturn it, and basically let them live with the consequences of it. And I might have actually gotten a better result in the end, more like the one I wanted. But when General Powell came to see me about the "don't ask, don't tell" policy, the commitments that were made were very different from the way that it worked out in practice later on. And so there was no question in my mind, given the way they laid out what their policy was going to be, that gay service people would be better off under the new policy than they were under the old one. It didn't work out that way, but the commitments that I got and the descriptions that I gave when I announced it at the War College, there's no question that if that had been followed through, the gays in the military would have been better off than they were under the old policy. And the thing that I didn't understand about the way things play out in public, because I really was inexperienced in the way Washington worked when I got there, is that sometimes you just need clarity. And even if you lose, it's better to lose with clarity than ambiguity. And what had not sunk in on, I think, even the press writing about this was that once the Senate voted 68 32, the jig was up. It was over, because everybody knew there were more than 300 votes in the House against the policy. So we had a veto proof majority in both Houses in favor of legislating the present policy, unless I could find some way to go forward. So that's what I tried to do. But the reason it came up first was essentially because the Joint Chiefs and Dole were determined<stop><start>So it wasn't the Andrea Mitchell question on November 11th?<stop><start>No.<stop><start>It was up<stop><start>Because I had lots of options there. I mean, Harry Truman basically, if you go back and look at what he did with integration of the military, he basically signed an order that said Integrate come back within 3 years and tell me how you did it.<stop><start>You could have signed an Executive order.<stop><start>I could have done that. And like I said, in retrospect, we would have had greater clarity. And since there had been so many problems with implementing the policy, I'm not sure that for the past 6 years it would have been better. Now I think Secretary Cohen has really taken hold of this thing, and there have been some changes in the last 6 months that I think really will make the future better than the previous policy was.<stop><start>But to go back to the original question, I have a strong sense that during that first year, year and a half, you weren't satisfied with the way the White House was working.<stop><start>No, because I thought we were often first of all, we had to do some stuff that was tough, that was going to get us out of position. Our foreign policy team, I think, was working very well, and except for it took us too long to build an international consensus in Bosnia. But we eventually did it and did the right thing there. We were doing well in the Middle East. We took a big, bold step away from the traditional American position to get involved in the Irish peace process. And on balance, I was pleased with that. And actually, a lot of people have forgotten this, but when I came back from Jordan, from the signing of the peace agreement in the Wadi Araba in Jordan in late '94, right before the election, we were still in reasonably good shape, because my numbers went back up and that helped the Democrats. But I still believe that the underlying problems were the reasons for the election results. But the political problems of gays in the military hurt. I think that we had a lot of I was more frustrated by operational things, like leaks on Supreme Court appointments that weren't even accurate, and I thought that the White House was not operating politically in a way that I thought was effective. I thought, policywise, we weren't out of position on anything except the retrospective on health care. And I've already said what I thought the political mistake was there, about how I should have handled it, given the fact<stop><start>If you had to do it over again, you would have done welfare reform in '94 and the crime bill?<stop><start>If I had to do it over again, I would have tried to do the welfare reform and the crime bill in '94, together, and started a bipartisan process on health care. I would have had Hillary up and meeting, issue the report with basic principles that whole 600page however long it was, the stuff we did, I would have given it all to the Congress and said, "Either you write a bill, or we write a bill together." Independent Counsel's Investigation<stop><start>Let me give you another, I think a tough "if you had to do it all over again." When I look back on this period, you were rolling at the end of '93. You did NAFTA. You gave the speech in Memphis. I mean, even I was writing positive stuff about you at that point. And then came the wave of stupid scandal stories, the Troopergate story, the Whitewater stuff. That December the Washington Post asked for all the documents. And there was a meeting that you had, maybe the only time in recorded history that George and David Gergen agreed and said you should turn over all the data, everything. And you didn't do it. Do you regret that? Do you think that that changed things?<stop><start>I don't believe, given the subsequent coverage of the Whitewater thing, it would have made any difference. What I regret is asking for the special counsel, because under the law that existed before and the law that existed after, under neither law could a special counsel be called. They had one<stop><start>Why did you do it? I was there the night you did it. You were in Ukraine, Kiev.<stop><start>Yes. I did it because I was exhausted, because I just buried my mother, and I had poor judgment. And I had people in the White House who couldn't stand the heat of the bad stories, and they suggested that I do it and that I'd have to do it. And I knew that there was nothing there. I knew it was just one guy lying. And I had Bernie Nussbaum and Bruce and a few other people screaming at me not to do it. They said, "You don't understand." I knew that Janet Reno would appoint a Republican, even though all other Presidents had been investigated by people who had basically supported them. Lawrence Walsh supported Reagan Sirica no, what's his name?<stop><start>Sirica.<stop><start>No, Sirica was the judge. Jaworski supported Nixon. I knew Reno wouldn't do that. I knew Reno would appoint a Republican, but I knew that there was nothing there. I knew she'd appoint an honest, professional prosecutor. So I just did it, but it was wrong, because the decision to appoint a special counsel is a decision to bankrupt anybody who's not rich. I mean, by definition, there's a penalty associated with it. But if Fiske had been allowed to do his job, this whole thing would have been over in '95 or '96. And of course, that's why he was replaced, because he was going to do his job.<stop><start>Just staying on this for a minute<stop><start>But do I think so? No, because I think I mean, I don't want to get into this. I shouldn't talk about this much until I'm out of office. But I believe that the desire, the almost hysterical desire to have something to investigate was so great that it wouldn't have made any difference, because, look, what did this thing hang on? There was nothing in those private papers that we we gave it all to the Justice Department. There was nothing in there that did anything other than support what the report said, which was that we lost money on a real estate investment. And if you noticed, when Starr got ahold of this, he immediately abandoned that and just went on to other stuff. There was never anything to it. And I do not believe I have no reason to believe, given the coverage of the events of Whitewater, that it would have made any difference. I think they would have found some way to say, "Oh, there are questions here let's have a special counsel." But do I wish I had done it? I mean, I don't know. Criticism of the President<stop><start>Last week you talked about the clanging tea kettle, and you know I've written this continuum I've wrote that this era is going to be remembered more for the severity for the ferocity of its prosecutions than for the severity of the crimes. And there's never been anything proven. And yet, the hatred and the vitriol has been relentless. What do you think it is about you? Do you think it's you? Do you think it's us, our generation? And what about the Steve Skowronek theory, the Yale professor who talked about Third Way Presidents like you, like Wilson, substantively like Nixon, people who take the best of the opposition's agenda, sand off the rough edges, implement it, and are therefore distrusted by their own party and hated by the opposition?<stop><start>Well, I think that that I read his book, and it's a very good book. But I think in this case that's not accurate, for the following reasons. Number one, if you go back to '93 and '94, the Democrats in Congress supported me more strongly than they had supported a higher percentage of Democrats voted for my programs than voted for Kennedy, Johnson, or Carter. It was that the Republican opposition was more unanimous. Number two, the Republicans never owned crime and welfare. They owned them rhetorically, but they didn't do much about it. And at least in the tradition that I came out of as a Governor, we thought we were supposed to act on crime and welfare. Nobody when you check into the morgue, they don't ask for your party registration. And I never knew that anybody had a vested interest in poor people being out of work. And so I just never accepted that, and I found that there were a lot of Democrats in the Congress that were eager to deal with those issues. And if you look at it, we had I don't know more than two thirds of the Democrats in the House and more than 75 percent of the Democrats in the Senate voted for welfare reform. And we had a higher percentage of Democrats than Republicans in the Senate voting for it and slightly higher percentage of Republicans than Democrats voting for it in the House but not huge. So I think that maybe transformational figures generally inspire that, because most times people like to deal with folks they can put in a box. Maybe it's just maybe it's something about me that made them mad. You know my favorite joke about the guy that's walking along the edge of Grand Canyon and falls off so this guy is hurtling down hundreds of feet to certain death. And he looks out, and he grabs this twig, and it breaks his fall. He heaves a sigh of relief. Then all of a sudden he sees the roots coming loose. He looks up in the sky and says, "God, why me? I'm a good person. I've taken care of my family. I've paid my taxes. I've worked all my life. Why me?" And this thunderous voice says, "Son, there's just something about you I don't like." Laughter I don't know. I don't think<stop><start>The folks like you. They never cared about this stuff.<stop><start>But I believe the Republicans thought I told you, I think that they thought<stop><start>It wasn't just them. It was us, too.<stop><start>Yes. The press, I think I wasn't part of the Washington establishment, and I think that the press didn't know what to make of me. I think this travel office deal, it was largely a press deal. I mean, I didn't know that they thought they owned the travel office. It was a weird deal. And of course, all I ever heard was one guy in the press who happened to be the head of the White House Correspondents at the time said, "I wish you'd have somebody look into this because the costs are going up and it's not working well." I didn't realize that everybody else didn't care what happened. It was a strange thing. But I think that all I can tell you is that the same guy that told me the same Senator that told me that it was about making people think I'd done something wrong in Whitewater also said that the Republicans had learned a lot from my Presidency. He said, before, that they thought there was a liberal press. And he said, "Now we have a different view. We think that they are liberal and that they vote like you, but they think like us, and that's more important." And I said, "What do you mean?" And he said, "Well, we just don't believe in Government very much, but we love power." And he says, "You know, the press wants to be powerful, and we both get it the same way, by hurting you." There could be something to that. But I'm sure maybe there were times when I didn't handle it all that well in the early going. But all I can tell you is, if you look back over it, the Whitewater thing was a total fraud. Now, I've got a friend named Brandy Ayres, who is the editor of a little newspaper in Addison, Alabama. Do you know who he is?<stop><start>I've met him, yes.<stop><start>He wrote an editorial that said, "This is what always happens when Republicans get in the majority. They did it when they got in the majority after World War II. They tried to convince us Harry Truman and Dean Acheson were Communists. And then the second time, they gave us McCarthy. And now, they gave us this." I don't know. I think part of it is how you view power. But for whatever reason, there is something about me that they didn't like very much. But it all worked out all right. Like I said, I'm sure that my not being familiar with Washington mores may have had something to do with the way I didn't handle the press right. Maybe I didn't<stop><start>Yes, you know I mean, I've said this in print, so I can say it to your face. You're the most talented politician I've ever come across, and you're not a slow study. That's the other thing we know about you.<stop><start>But I think in the beginning, for the first 2 years, I thought I was pushing a lot of rocks up the hill. I was obsessed. Thomas Patterson, who has written books about the Presidency and the media and all that, he said in '95 that I'd already kept a higher percentage of my campaign promises than the previous five Presidents, which I felt really good about. We had just lost the Congress. I needed something to feel good about. But I do believe in '95 I was and '93 and '94, I was just fixated on trying to get as much done as quickly as I could, and also on trying to learn the job, get the White House functioning, all that kind of stuff. And I think that I did not spend enough time probably at least working with the media, letting them ask me questions, at least trying to get the whole letting them get something in perspective. And I think maybe I was just the last gasp of 25 years of scandal mania. We may be swinging the other way on the pendulum now. Oklahoma City<stop><start>I think, after '98, maybe we've learned. I think we're doing a little bit better this year. You might see that in a different way. Let's talk about '95 for a second. To my mind, the period of this Presidency that is most touching to me, I think, are the weeks after well, the 2 days, April 18, 1995<stop><start>Oklahoma City?<stop><start>No, the press conference the night before Oklahoma City when you said the President is still relevant here. I thought, "Oh, my God, that must be the rock bottom for him."<stop><start>Well, actually, it wasn't. I didn't have the same reaction to it than maybe you know, we often don't perceive ourselves as others see us. But that question, I learned something from that, which is, if someone asks you a question that you want to answer directly, but there's a word in it that's dynamite, you should answer it without using the word, because actually, what I was doing in April of '95 in my own mind was prefiguring the fight which occurred at the end of '95 and the end of '96. That is, I honestly didn't feel pathetic or irrelevant or anything. I knew that in the end, if a veto proof minority of my party would stay with me, after the terrible licking they'd taken in '94, if they would stay with me, I believed in the end we'd have our chance to make our case to the American people. In other words, I believed it would turn out the way it did turn out at the end of '95 and the beginning of '96. So actually, to me, it wasn't the worst point of the Presidency. When they asked me that question, a light went on in my head. I actually felt good about it. But because I used the word, it came out people perceived it differently than I did. I didn't feel that about it.<stop><start>But then, a week later, you said at Michigan State, you said, "You can't love your country and despise its Government." And that's when a light went off in my mind He's figured out how he's going to go up against these folks.<stop><start>Yes, that's what I believed. I think the Oklahoma City thing was awful. It was awful. But I think it began a kind of reassessment, a kind of breaking of the ice. And I don't mean that God knows<stop><start>Someone told me that you said, you told them that you wouldn't use the word "bureaucrat" again in a speech after that.<stop><start>Yes. I did. It affected even me. I realized that I had played on the resentments people feel about Government. And I thought that when Government did something stupid or indefensible, they ought to be taken on. But I realized that even when you do that, you have to be careful what word you use. And I did say that. I said, "How many times have I used the word bureaucrat, and there are people there." And I didn't mean to say that I or even Newt Gingrich was responsible for Timothy McVeigh. I don't want to get that's what he did. Are the liberals responsible for Susan Smith, the one throwing her kid out the window? I didn't want to get into that. But Oklahoma City had a profound impact on me, too. I went down there, and I was sitting there with the relatives, and one of the people that was killed had been in my Inaugural, and I was talking to his kinfolk. And I said, you know I just made up my mind I would try never again to discuss the Government, even people's frustrations with it, in a way that could be directed against categories of people. It really had a big impact on me, and I think it did on the country.<stop><start>Would it be fair to say that by the time you gave that speech at Michigan State, you were ready for battle?<stop><start>Yes. Yes. Balancing the Budget<stop><start>Now, this is a really interesting part of your Presidency to me. You had at that point a brilliant strategy in place to screw them. It was, smoke them out. You could have just sat there and said, "Well, what's your plan?" You could have done to them what they did to you in '94. And yet, you insisted, ultimately against, from what I can gather, your entire staff, including people like Bob Rubin you insisted on coming out with your own budget, your own balanced budget, that June. Why did you do that? I mean you didn't have to politically, right?<stop><start>No, probably not. In other words, I could have done to them what they did to me. And that was the argument, that we'd just say no to them like they just said no to us. But governing is important to me. And I thought that in the end we would all be judged by how we had performed and by whether we had performed. And this may sound naive, but I believed that in the end, we could change the politics of Washington. See, one of the reasons I ran for President is, I didn't just want to prove that I could play the game they'd all been playing with each other "I got an idea. You got an idea. Let's fight, and maybe we can both get our 15 seconds on the evening news." That's basically the operative mode. I didn't want to do that. I came here to do things. I wanted to be President to do things, to change the country, to be relevant. And I thought that the Democrats I didn't think the Republicans would take us up on it initially, because Gingrich had basically made it clear that he wanted to basically be prime minister of the country and turn me into a ceremonial and foreign policy President. We'd have the French system, in effect.<stop><start>Not only that, he told me on the phone one night he was personally going to lead a Wesleyan revolution that year.<stop><start>So that's basically what he wanted to do. But I just felt that the Democrats could not sacrifice what I was trying to do was to build the Democrats as a party of fiscal responsibility. I wanted to prove that you could be socially progressive and fiscally responsible. And for us and I went out there saying, "Look, our credo is opportunity, responsibility, community." I just didn't see that I could stand there and say, "What do you expect of me? I'm just<stop><start>They're in the majority." That's just not my way. I believe that you have to do things if you can. And my own view of politics is that there's always plenty that the parties are honestly divided about at election time, no matter how much you get done. Furthermore, I really did believe that the Democrat Party, in the end, would be successful by developing what is now known as the Third Way, but which I really saw as basically an information age version of what we'd always been for. Second Term Agenda<stop><start>What was your fantasy for a second term? If you'd had everything you wanted the day after you were reelected, what would it have been?<stop><start>Well, the validation of the economic strategy has been a part of it. I would have finished the job in health care and enacted my entire education budget. And the rest of it is still sort of pending. The Irish peace process worked out the way I'd hoped. I'm still hoping that we'll get more done in the Middle East. It's very difficult, but I'm hoping we will. And then, on the foreign policy front, it's going to pretty much work out the way I'd hoped it would, I think.<stop><start>When I look back at your speeches, if there were a couple of paragraphs where you best describe your political philosophy, the Third Way, they were in the 1998 State of the Union Address, and nobody paid any attention. And you know why?<stop><start>Because I was standing what I got credit for there was just getting up, standing up. Laughter<stop><start>What was the opportunity cost of that scandal? What did it cost you?<stop><start>I don't know yet, because actually we did in '98 we won seats in the House of Representatives, the first time a President's party has done that since<stop><start>I mean, substantively.<stop><start>Well, I don't know, because I don't know whether the Congress, the Republicans would have been more willing to work with me or not. Social Security Medicare Reform<stop><start>What about things like Social Security reform could you have made a<stop><start>Maybe. What I wanted to do with Social Security I am disappointed there. We still may get some Medicare restructural reform out of this. And in any case, Medicare is going to be okay for 30 years, which is the longest it's been okay for in forever and ever. And I think<stop><start>Yes, but that's a problem, for God sakes. I mean, the generational transfer issue, I think, is something that you're really concerned about.<stop><start>I am concerned about it. But<stop><start>You can't keep a fee forservice<stop><start>But, but, but both Medicare taxes and Social Security taxes, in fairness, since 1983 have been paying for everything else. So we've had a little of that in reverse.<stop><start>That's very good.<stop><start>Everybody has forgotten that. We've been dumping all these Social Security and Medicare taxes into the general economy all this time. I personally believe, though, that I regret we didn't get to do Social Security because I would have what happened was, I think maybe we could have gotten it if we hadn't had that whole impeachment thing. But there was more resistance in both parties to do anything than I had imagined there was. They'll have to come to terms with this. It will have to be done. And I think you've either got to raise taxes, cut benefits, or increase the rate of return. What I proposed in '98 on Social Security, I think, was a very good beginning, and I really thought we'd get something. Was that '98 or '99?<stop><start>That was '98. And there was also the Breaux Thomas, later Breaux Frisk commission on Medicare. You could have, with your abilities, you could have gotten some kind of deal if you'd been able to at that point.<stop><start>Maybe. But they<stop><start>Breaux was your guy, right?<stop><start>Well, I don't agree with what he wanted to do there, and he knows that. I mean, I thought I agree with some of what they proposed, but some of what they proposed I think would not be good for Medicare. On policy grounds, he and I have had long discussions about it. I think there are a couple of things in that report that I just simply didn't agree with. Safety Net<stop><start>In general, when you talk about an information age safety net, what would it be, and what would be the guiding principles? I don't think that you can have the kind of centralized, top down sort of programs that Social Security and Medicare<stop><start>I think if you had yes, but there's a great article let me just say this. There's a great article in the New York Times Sunday Magazine the day before yesterday<stop><start>The Sara Mosle article?<stop><start>about voluntarism. And I don't believe I think you have to have some sort of if you believe there should be a safety net, there has to be some sort of safety net. Now, there's all kinds of options to get it done, and I think there should be more you can have some more room for private initiative. But if you had a safety net that worked, you'd have something for the poor and the disabled, the people who through no fault of their own were in trouble. You would have genuinely worldclass education for everybody who needed it, which is everybody. You would have access to health care at an affordable rate and decent housing, and you'd have to have a lifetime learning system. And then I think you'd have to have some more generous version of the new markets initiative I proposed, because there will always be unevenness in the growth of the market economy. That's part of its genius, because you have to have opportunity for new things to branch out. But in my view, this new markets thing has been underappreciated.<stop><start>I was out there a year ago watching Al From and Jesse Jackson cavort along beside you.<stop><start>And it may be one of the great opportunities for bipartisan achievement in this session. It may be one of the great opportunities because Hastert is completely committed to it. He's been as good as his word on everything. And I think Lott knows it's the right thing to do. I've talked to them both a lot. We do have a good working relationship now, even though we have our differences. I think the Senate has been far too grudging on the judges, particularly since I appointed basically mainstream judges. But they want more ideologues, and they hope they can get them next year. And I hope they can't, and we'll see what happens. But anyway, I think a part of the safety net ought to be viewed as a willingness of the Government to make continuing extraordinary efforts, including big tax incentives, to keep the people in places that are left behind in the emerging global economy keep giving them a chance to catch up. And I think this whole digital divide is a I prefer to think of it as a digital bridge. I think if you think about what this means, basically, this information economy can collapse distances in a way that telephones and railroads and electrical I mean, I think about it in terms of Arkansas. When they brought us REA and the Interstate Highway System and I put all these little airports up in remote towns and all that, it all helped to bring, like, small scale manufacturing to places that had been left behind. But there was always the factor of distance. And then I got to a place like the Shiprock Navajo Reservation, where they make really beautiful jewelry, for example, where the unemployment rate is 58 percent and only 30 percent of the people have telephones. And you realize that if they really were part of an information age economy, there are ways in which they could do I remember when I became President there were a lot of banks in New York shipping their data processing to Northern Ireland every day every day and then bringing it back. There are all kinds of opportunities that we never had before. And I think people ought to start thinking about that as a part of the safety net. Information Technology<stop><start>You know, this raises an interesting point about you, personally. Shalala said to me that she thought that just as you were obsessed and voracious about social policy when you were Governor in the eighties that's one of the things I first noticed about you, is that you knew everything. I mean, you knew about the schools up here in East Harlem, more than Cuomo did, in fact. But as you were to social policy in the eighties, you've been hungry in the same way for knowledge about science and technology in the nineties. And I talked to Harold Varmus about it, and other people have said the same thing. Is that true? And in that regard, talk to me a little bit about the policy that you pursued in high tech and information age things that I don't understand that well, like telecommunications and<stop><start>Well, let's talk about that. The one thing in our mantra about our economic policy which we always repeat fiscal responsibility, expanded trade, and investing in people those three things really were the sort of three stools of our economic policy. But one thing I think that tends to understate is the role that technology, particularly information technology, has played in this remarkable growth and the productivity growth and the long economic expansion. And I think our major contribution to that, apart from getting interest rates down so capital can flow to that sector, was in the Telecommunications Act of '96. And there were our major contributions to that act I might say, Al Gore deserves a lot of credit for because he was our front guy on it were two. One is we insisted that the Telecom Act would be very much pro competition, which required us to get into a very difficult political fight principally with the RBOC's, operating companies, many of whom I've had very good relationships with because they do great stuff. They've helped us on all of our digital divide stuff, a lot of the new market stuff. But I just thought that we had to bend over backwards to maximize the opportunity for people with ideas to start new companies and get in and compete. And we fought that through, and it delayed the passage of the Telecom Act, but eventually we got what we wanted. And as I remember, while there were more Democrats than Republicans for our position, there were actually people on both sides of both parties. But we very much wanted to have a procompetition bias. The other night, interestingly enough, I was at dinner in New York with a friend of mine who was in the telecom business and then got in the venture capital business with telecom. He had a dinner for me, and I had dinner with like 40 people, all of whom headed companies that didn't exist in 1996. I went out to UUP, which is an Internet connection company, which had 40 or 80 employees, something like that, in 1993, when I became President, and they have 8,000 now. I mean, it's amazing. So that was good. And the second thing we did was to fight for the E rate, which democratized the Internet and democratized the telecommunications revolution. We've got 95 percent of our schools have at least one Internet connection, and 90 percent of the poorest schools have an Internet connection. So I think that those are the two things that happened. And then I also continued to push relentlessly these last 8 years for greater investment in science and technology. It was interesting I've had an interesting relationship with the Congress since the Republicans won the majority, because they look around for things that they can spend more money on than me.<stop><start>NIH.<stop><start>Yes. And it's been very interesting. They knew they would always be whatever defense number I proposed, they'd always be for more. And they liked to I'm always for a balance between mass transit and highways, and they're always a little more on the highways side. But the big area was NIH. And Harold Varmus did a brilliant job when the Republicans won the Congress, he brought all these freshmen Congressmen out, showed them the NIH, showed them what they were doing, explained the genome project to them. And I think John Porter was the head of the subcommittee in the House that had this. He's a good man. He's smart, and he wanted to do the right thing. And so, anyway, I figured out after the first go round that whatever I proposed, they'd propose more, which suited me fine because I basically don't think you can spend too much on those things. But the problem I had early on and the problem I still have is, notwithstanding how much money we have, the Republicans do not, in my view, spend enough money on non NIH research. For example, they just took out all the money that I proposed for nanotechnology, this highly microscopic technology which could increase the power of computer generation by unfathomable amounts. Now, why is that a mistake? Because as one night Hillary had we had all these millennial evenings at the White House. And then we had one the other day on outer space and the deep oceans we did it in the afternoon. But we had one on the human genome project, and we had Eric Lander from Harvard, who is a biological scientist, and we had Vint Cerf, who was one of the developers of the Internet. He actually sent the first E mail ever sent, 18 years ago or 19 years ago now to his then profoundly deaf wife, who now can hear because she's got a microdigital chip that's been planted deep in her ear. She heard, at 50 she said she's sure she's the only person who's ever heard James Taylor sing "Fire And Rain" at the age of 50 for the first time. She came and sort of stood up and was exhibit A. But the point they were making is that the biomedical advances that would flow out of the human genome project, which the Republican majority will support lavishly, depended upon the development of the computer technology, and that without the development of the computer technology, you could never parse something as small as the human genome and get into all these genes and understand all the permutations. For example, there was a fascinating article the other day about one of the implications of the human genome, saying that talking about these two women who had a form of cancer, and that basically, if you look at the historical studies of all women in this category with this kind of cancer, diagnosed at this point in their illness, that you would say they had a 45 percent chance of survival. But now they can do genetic testing showing that they actually have very different conditions, and that one of them had a 20 percent chance of survival, the other had an 80 percent chance of survival. Now, the reason they can do that is because not only of the biological advances but the nonbiological advances that make it possible to measure the biological differences. And I could give you lots of other examples. And again, I owe a lot of this to Al Gore. He convinced me in 1993 that climate change was real. And he wrote that book in '88, and they're still making fun of his book. And I remember as late as last year we had a House subcommittee that treated climate change like a conspiracy to destroy the economy of the United States. But now, you've got all the major oil companies admitting that it's real, that the climate really is warming at an unsustainable rate. And that's why we pushed the Kyoto Protocol and why I want to spend a lot more money, and also have tax incentives, for people to keep making advances in energy technologies and environmental conservation technologies. So my frustration about where we are now is that I'm really grateful that the Republican majority has embraced NIH, because it's been good and it's enabled me to present budgets under the old budget caps that I knew they would break, so I could get adequate funding for education, for example, and still know we're going to do a really good job on NIH. But I think we need a much broader commitment in the Congress to research in other areas of science and technology, going beyond the biological sciences. At this point, a portion of the interview was missing from the transcript. Events of 1998<stop><start>when it became clear to you I mean, I know this is prompting you to sound braggart, but so be it. There must have come a time when you realized, "Hey, our economic policy worked. This whole thing is taking off, and my larger sense of us moving from the industrial age to the information age is really true, and all of a sudden we have these surpluses." Was there a moment when the bolt of lightning hit and knocked you off the donkey on the way to the West Wing? Was there a day when you realized that<stop><start>I spent a lot of '98 trying to dodge bolts of lightning. Laughter<stop><start>Well, that's the irony of this, I think, is that that was probably going to be the moment that the press was going to realize that there had been a coherence to this whole project all along, and we managed to work our way out of that.<stop><start>In '98, I spent a lot of '98<stop><start>Is it fair to say '98 was the time that this<stop><start>Yes, yes. And I spent a lot of '98 sort of wrestling with three overwhelming feelings. One is, obviously there was a lot of pain involved because I had made a terrible personal mistake, which I did try to correct, which then a year later got outed on or almost a year later and had to live with. And it caused an enormous amount of pain to my family and my administration and to the country at large, and I felt awful about it. And I had to deal with the aftermath of it. And then, I had to deal with what the Republicans were trying to do with it. But I had a totally different take on it than most people. I really believed then and I believe now I was defending the Constitution. And while I was responsible for what I did, I was not responsible for what they did with what I did that was their decision and that I had to defend the Constitution. And so I felt that I still believe historically two of the great achievements of my administration were facing down the Government shutdown in '95 and '96, and then facing this back, and that those two things together essentially ended the most overt and extreme manifestations of the Gingrich revolution. And then the third thing I felt was this "Gosh, it is all working, and it's coming together, and all these things will be possible." And I still believe if we can get one or two things straight for the future, that a lot of the good stuff is still ahead.<stop><start>I'm not going to let you off that so easily. Were there days, were there moments that you remember where you saw, hey, this is happening?<stop><start>Yes, I was really happy. I just was happy because I thought to be fair, I don't think any of us thought in '93 if you asked me in '93, "What level of confidence do you have this economic plan is going to work," I would say very, very high. And if you asked me, "What do you mean by working,"' when I started in '93, I would say we'd probably have between 16 million and 18 million new jobs. I never would have guessed 22.5 million and maybe more. I would have said I was fairly sure that we'd get rid of the deficit by the time I left office. I didn't know in '93 that we'd be paying off nearly 400 billion of the national debt when I left office and we'd be looking at taking America out of debt, which is a goal I hope will be ratified by this election. And I hope the American people will embrace that, because I think that's quite important. So in '98 I began to imagine just how far we could go, you know, and to think about that. Race Relations<stop><start>There's another aspect to this that we haven't talked about that I think has really been central. In '93 would you have predicted that the state of race relations would have gotten to the point that it's gotten to now? I mean, I don't know whether you can sense I sensed it out on the trail this year. Bob Dole went to Bob Jones in '96 and didn't pay any price at all, did he? This year you couldn't do it. And everywhere you go in this country, people of different races are having lunch together and holding hands.<stop><start>I confess, you know, I like Senator Dole very much, but I would have made him pay a price if I had known he went to Bob Jones University. I just didn't know.<stop><start>You didn't know about the dating policy?<stop><start>No, I didn't know he went to Bob Jones University. I didn't know about the dating policy, but I knew about Bob Jones because I'm a white southerner. And I think the Bob Jones thing I think Governor Bush going there mattered more maybe to white southerners my age who supported civil rights than maybe to even other Americans, because it has a whole because of the history there. It was a big deal to me. I just didn't know. But I do believe we have come a long way. And I think I hope I made some contribution to that, because I think it's really important. I've tried to get Americans to understand that how we handle this I still believe how we handle this is, in a way, the most important thing, because we're a great country and we're full of smart people and we nearly always get it right, unless we get in our own way. And it's just like me nations are like people, individuals, in the sense that very often all their greatest wounds are self inflicted. And this whole state of racism, it's a self inflicted wound.<stop><start>This was where I was wrong on affirmative action, I think, in the end, when I kicked you around on that.<stop><start>I never wanted it to last forever, and I think that we had to clean up some of the contracting policies and some of the other things. But we<stop><start>Have those been done?<stop><start>Well, we made some changes, and I hear a lot of complaining about it from people that have been affected by them. But I still believe that and to be fair to my critics or skeptics, it's a lot easier to sell an affirmative action in good economic times than in tough economic times. I believe what launched the assault on affirmative action in the beginning was that, number one, it did seem to be that nobody was ever reexamining it, its premises. But secondly, the big start was in California because California was suffering so much from a recession in the late eighties and early nineties. And people felt that they were being disenfranchised, and they felt that the circumstances were squeezing in on them anyway, and they didn't want any other burdens that they lost just because they happened to be in the majority. So I think maybe the acid test of whether I was right or not won't come until there's another period of economic difficulty. Welfare Reform<stop><start>People argue the same on welfare reform, as well, although<stop><start>But I think there's enough evidence in on that. I think if there are adversities coming out of welfare reform in the next economic downturn, or as far as there are now, it may be because it's largely because of decisions States have made about how to spend or not to spend properly the big extra money they got because we grandfathered them in at the amount of money they were getting when welfare rolls were at their height in February of '94. I think that's when we did that. Maybe it was '96, but I think it was '94. I think we grandfathered them anyway, whatever month it was, we grandfathered their cash flow in when welfare rolls were high, on the theory that we wanted them to spend this money on education, on transportation, on housing assistance, on training people to not just take jobs but to be able to keep jobs, or find new jobs if they lost them. And there are some stories coming in which are troubling, but which have more to do with decisions that were made at the State level. The thing that some of the people who criticized me on the left for welfare reform never understood, I don't think they said, "Oh, gosh, he's ending this national benefit." But that was a joke, because for more than 20 years, by 1996, States had been able to set their own rate. So you had the family support monthly support for a family of three on welfare varied anywhere from a low of 187 a month to a high of 665 a month on the day I signed the welfare reform bill. So to pretend that there was somehow some national income safety net was a joke. Nobody was going to go below 187 a month. And if there was a political consensus for a higher level, they weren't going to go out and gut people. And the idea of spending this money to empower people to go into the workplace and then require people who could do so to try to get their personal act together and access the benefits and go in there, and then letting them keep their medical coverage for a while, is very, very important. The only thing I didn't like about the welfare reform bill was not that it was the immigrant thing. But the two I vetoed everybody acted at the time the only thing that really disturbed me, and I realized I had not succeeded in getting people into the intricacies of welfare policy, was that I had people, both liberals and conservatives, who said, "Well, he vetoed two of them, but he signed the third one because it's getting close to the election, and he wants credit for that." That's not true. The thing we were fighting about was whether or not, if you required people on welfare to go to work and they refused to meet the requirement that is, they acted in a way that violated the responsibility portions of the law how do you minimize the impact on their kids? And what I was unwilling to do, because there was a uniform national benefit there, was to scrap the food stamps or the Medicaid coverage for the children, where we did have a uniform national standard and nowhere near the variations that already existed in the monthly cash payment. So I thought that finally when they agreed to put those back in, I believed, given the way the budget fights were unfolding and by then I was in my second one, in '96 that within a couple of years I would be able to restore most of the immigrant cuts. And sure enough, we did. So I still think that some of them are not right and that we haven't restored, but I think, on balance, the welfare reform bill was a big net advance in American social policy and the right thing to do. Budget Negotiations<stop><start>That's an interesting phrase, "given the way the budget fights were unfolding." There seems to have been a pattern since '95, and I think that that may be part of the reason why people might not see the whole of what has gone on here is that a lot of the stuff you've gotten since '95 has come in budget reconciliations at the end of the year<stop><start>Huge. And I've got to give a lot of credit to Panetta and Bowles, who was brilliant at it, and John Podesta and Ricchetti and all these people that worked the Congress, because they and the congressional leadership in our party. Keep in mind, any time that our support among the Democratic minority drops below a third plus one, I have no power in the budget process. So I think that but we have gotten enormous amounts done for poor people, for the cause of education we've gone from a million dollars a year in 3 years to 445 million a year, something like that, in programs for after school. And my budget this year, if we get that, we'll really be able to put an afterschool program in every failing school in America if we get what I asked for this year. Amazing stuff. I think that's one of the reasons that a lot of what we did in education has not been fully appreciated. Education<stop><start>Ten million people taking advantage of HOPE scholarships and lifelong learning credits this year, according to Gene.<stop><start>That's right.<stop><start>I mean, are you frustrated that this kind of stuff isn't more known?<stop><start>Oh, a little bit. But the main thing for me now is that it's happening. And the other thing that I think is really important I'd just like to mention, that I think almost no one knows, that I think is, over the long run, particularly if we can get it's interesting, the Republicans say they're for accountability, but they won't adopt my "Education Accountability Act," which would require more explicit standards, more explicit "turn around failing schools or shut them down," and voluntary national tests, which they're against, but we're working on it still. But just what we did in '94 in '94, in a little known provision of our reenactment of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act, we required States to identify getting Title I money to identify failing schools and to develop strategies to turn them around. States like Kentucky that have taken it seriously have had a breathtaking result. I was down at that little school in Kentucky, in eastern Kentucky, the other day. And it was a failing school, one of the worst in Kentucky, over half the kids on school lunches now ranked in the top 20 elementary schools in Kentucky, in 3 years.<stop><start>What did they do?<stop><start>Well, let me tell you the results they got. In 3 years, here's what happened. They went from 12 percent of the kids reading at or above grade level to 57 percent. They went from 5 percent of the kids doing math at or above grade level to 70 percent. They went from zero percent of the kids doing at or above grade level in science to 63 percent in 3 years. And they ranked 18th in the performance of elementary schools in Kentucky. Well, smaller classes, good school leadership, heavy involvement by the parents, and basically measuring their performance. It's stunning I mean, it's just amazing. I was in a school the other day in Spanish Harlem that in 2 years went from 80 percent of the kids doing reading and math at or below grade level to 74 percent of the kids doing reading and math at or above grade level below grade level, 80 percent below, to 74 percent at or above grade level in 2 years. And I know what they did there because I spent a lot of time there. They got a new principal, and they basically they went to a school uniform policy, one of my little ideas that was falsely maligned, had a huge impact. And they basically went to they established goals and results, and you either met them, or you didn't. It's amazing. And these children, the pride these children felt was breathtaking. So one of the things I mean, I think one of the most important accomplishments of the administration was basically opening the doors of college to everybody with the HOPE scholarships and the direct loans. And if we could just get this tuition tax deductibility, then we haven't made it possible for every person making 40,000 to send all their kids to Yale, but we made it possible for everybody to send all their kids somewhere.<stop><start>That's not refundable, is it?<stop><start>Not refundable, but it is deductible at the 28 percent level for people that are in the 15 percent income tax bracket.<stop><start>Oh, I see. So it's a kind of semideduction.<stop><start>Yes, well, in our proposal you get to deduct up to 10,000 at the 28 percent level even if you're in the 15 percent income tax bracket. So it's not refundable, but for the people that need refundability, they have access to the Pell grants and to loans they can pay back now as a percentage of their income under the direct loan program.<stop><start>You're getting restless. Let me ask you one last well, I'm not going to guarantee this is one last. I might want to ask you if I have a few more over time, is there some way I can get in touch with you?<stop><start>Sure. You've interviewed 50 people. You've taken this seriously, so I want to try to Foreign Policy<stop><start>Well, it's the last 8 years of my life, too, you know. Laughter And I haven't even asked you about foreign policy, for God sakes. We'll do two things. Let me ask you about foreign policy. It seems to me that if you look at what you did, there are two big things you did in foreign policy. One was raise economic issues to the same level as strategic issues, which was crucial, and the other was to demonstrate over time that America was going to be involved and use force when necessary in the rest of the world. The second one is, obviously, more messy and dicey than the first. The third thing you did was essentially not do anything wrong and do really right things when it came to the big things like Middle East, Russia, China. The messy part of it is the dustups in places like Bosnia, Kosovo. People have told me that you really feel awful that you didn't do more in Rwanda. Is that true?<stop><start>Yes. I don't know that I could have. Let me back up and say, I had a when I came here, came to the White House, I sat down, basically, and made my own list of what I wanted to accomplish in foreign policy. I wanted to maximize the chance that Russia would take the right course. I wanted to maximize the chance that China would take the right course. I wanted to do what I could to minimize these ethnic slaughters, which basically the end of the cold war ripped the lid off. It's not that they didn't occur before, but now they became the main problem with the world. I wanted to try to create a unified Europe, which included an expanded NATO, supporting European unification, and dealing with all the countries around. I wanted to try to get Turkey into Europe as a bulwark against fundamentalist terrorism. That required some progress between Greece and Turkey, and we made some, not enough to suit me. I wanted to try to minimize the turbulence the possibility of war and nuclear war between India and Pakistan, which is something that was not right for my involvement until rather late in my term. But one of the things that and I wanted to try to and I'll leave this until last I wanted to try to broaden the notion in America of what foreign policy and national security was, to include health issues, to include like we made AIDS a national security threat to include climate change, to include the globalized society, all these issues we started talking about. So the one thing I would say to you is that I think this has all occurred kind of under the radar screen I'll come back to Rwanda but one of the things I think should be mentioned is, we have spent an enormous amount of money and time and effort focusing America on how to minimize the threats of biological warfare, of chemical warfare. What are we going to do? Will the miniaturization of the information revolution lead to small scale chemical, biological, even God forbid nuclear weapons? How are we going to deal with that? So we've done a lot of work on that. And to come back to Rwanda, one of the things I've tried to do with Africa is to and Sierra Leone is giving us a good test case here is to increase the capacity of the African nations to deal with their own problems, to support the regional operations like ECOWAS or OAU. And I developed something called the African Crisis Response Initiative, where we would go in and train African militaries. When I was in Senegal, for example, I went out to the community to the training site there, on our trip to Africa, and saw the American soldiers training with the Senegalese to dramatically increase their capacity. What happened basically with Rwanda is, we were obsessed with Bosnia and all the other stuff, and it was over in 90 days. I mean, they basically killed hundreds of thousands of people in 90 days. And I just don't think we were any of us focused on it and whether we could have done something. But I made up my mind that we would certainly try to increase the capacity of Africans to deal with it and we would move in as quickly as we could. And like I said, what happens in Sierra Leone is going to be a little test of that.<stop><start>Do you think you were prepared for being a foreign policy leader when you came in? What are the things that you've learned in terms of<stop><start>I would say yes and no. I think<stop><start>You had it in principle.<stop><start>I think I had a very because I'd been interested in it since I was a student in college, and I'd always been fascinated by world affairs. So the fact that I had not been a Senator or served in a previous administration I don't think was a particular disadvantage. I think all the economic stuff I think I had right and the fact that there was a lot more in economics involved, and it was about democracy it was about minimizing war it was about lifting people's sights so they had something better to do than killing their neighbors, be they were of a different religion or ethnic group I think we had that right. I think we basically had the nuclear issues right, and the big power issues right with Russia, with China, what we tried to do in the Korean Peninsula. Where I felt I think where I felt some frustration is maybe where even a President with a lot of experience would have felt frustration, a lot of experience in this, which is building the post cold war alliances, which proved to be very frustrating. I mean, we had a lot of frustrations and we got panned a lot, and maybe we deserved some of it, and maybe we didn't in '93 and '94, trying to put together some kind of coalition of our European allies to move in Bosnia. In Kosovo, having had the Bosnia experience, even though there were differences in the alliance, I have nothing but compliments for my allies. They were basically we had our arguments. We should have. Nobody has got a monopoly on truth. But basically, we got together we moved quickly we did the right things. And I think that the idea of how we might even go about mechanically, operationally, dealing with something like Rwanda just wasn't there. The French and others that had been more active in that part of Africa, I think they may have had a better sense of it, although they went in late.<stop><start>But you were acting with more confidence, too. You weren't asking you were telling.<stop><start>Yes, well, it happens once you've been around and you know people, you know what it was. But it was I think that some of that, when you've got to have some support from other countries and you can have an uncertain result but you think you have to try, it just takes a while until you get your sea legs and you get everything worked out, particularly when there aren't sort of institutional structures and policies and rules of the road there. And so I think we did get it right. If you take another sort of sad moment of the administration, when we lost our soldiers in Somalia<stop><start>Almost at the same time as the ship turned around in the harbor in Port au Prince.<stop><start>When we lost our soldiers in Somalia, it was a very sad thing. But that happened, I think and I hope the Congress will never decline to put people in peacekeeping missions because of it, because basically our guys did a terrific job there. But there was an operational, I think, decision made there, which, if I had to do it again, I might do what we did then, but I would do it in a different way. I remember General Powell coming to me and saying, "Aideed has killed all these Pakistanis, and they're our allies. Somebody needs to try to arrest him, and we're the only people with the capacity to do it." And he said, "We've got a 50 percent chance of getting him, and a 25 percent chance of getting him alive." And so, he said, "I think you ought to do it." And I said, "Okay." But today, with that number of people there and then he retired. He left, like, the next week. I'm not blaming him I'm just saying that he was gone. So what happened was, we had this huge battle in broad daylight where hundreds and hundreds of Somalis were killed, and we lost 18 soldiers, in what was a U.N. action that basically, if I were going to do it again, I would treat it just like if we were going to do that, I'd say, "Okay, I need to know what's involved here, and let's do this the way we planned out the military action we took against Saddam Hussein, for example, or the military action I took to try to get Usama bin Ladin's training camps, or anything else." It doesn't mean America shouldn't be involved in peacekeeping, but it means if you go beyond the normal parameters that you decide on the front end, then the United States has to operate in a very different way.<stop><start>There doesn't seem to be a uniform set of ground rules yet in place.<stop><start>I don't think there is, but we're getting there.<stop><start>Should there be? Could there be?<stop><start>I think it's pretty hard, but I think you anyway, I will always regret that. I don't know if I could have saved those lives or not, because I think what we were trying to do was the right thing to do, and the people who were there on the ground did the best they could. But I would have handled it in a different way if I had more experience, I think. I know I would have. The only other thing I was going to say about this is that we talked about earlier how I hope in the future that the Congress will give more support to science and technology, beyond NIH. I hope in the future the Congress will give more support to our national security budget beyond the defense budget. As well off as we are, one real big problem, we should be spending much more than we're spending, in my judgment, to fight global disease, to promote global development, to facilitate global peacemaking and peacekeeping. I think that we need to succeed in getting the bipartisan majority in Congress with a much broader view, because people look at us, and they know how much money we've got, and they know what our surplus is. And all these other countries are struggling, and we shouldn't be so begrudging I fight with the Congress all the time in our contributions to peacekeeping and to creating the conditions in which democracy and peace will flourish. I'm encouraged by how Congress voted in this Colombia package because it's a balanced package, and it has a lot of nonmilitary, nonpolice stuff in it. And I'm hopeful that we'll have a more I saw Ben Gilman had a very good article somebody else he and a Democrat, I can't remember who it was, wrote an article in the L.A. Times yesterday talking about the importance of the United States taking the lead in the international fight against global disease. That's one thing that I hope, after I'm gone, I hope that the next President will be more successful at than I was. President's Future Plans<stop><start>Let me ask you this is it after you're gone, you're going to be the youngest ex President since Teddy Roosevelt. If there was one thing that Teddy Roosevelt did absolutely awful, it was be an ex President. I mean, he was really terrible at it because he was so engaged, so involved, and he couldn't quit kibitzing.<stop><start>Well, he felt, to be fair to him, that the Republicans had abandoned his philosophy. He felt Taft had kind of let him down.<stop><start>You also have a restraining amendment in the Constitution that he didn't. But do you worry about that?<stop><start>No. Well, I do, because laughter but not in the way you think. I don't think that the next President, whoever it is, will have problems with me acting like I wish I were still President. I mean, I think I know how to behave, and I've been here, and I want my country to succeed. And for my country to succeed, the Presidency has to function. And I don't want to complicate that. So the challenge I have is to figure out how to have a meaningful life, how to use all this phenomenal experience I've got and what I know and the ideas I have in a way that helps my country and helps the things I believe in around the world and doesn't get in the way of the next President. And that's what I have to do. I've got to figure out how to do it.<stop><start>Any thoughts?<stop><start>I've thought about it, but I'm not ready to talk about it yet. But the one thing that I laughter<stop><start>You've talked about everything else today. Laughter Philosophy of the Presidency<stop><start>Yes, but the one thing that I the reason I wanted to spend so much time with this interview if you want to talk to me anymore, just call, and we'll talk more on the phone is that you always knew and even when you got mad at me, it was because you thought I'd stopped it that I would take this job seriously. I mean, the basic thing that I can tell you about this is, I will leave Washington, believe it or not, after all I've been through, more idealistic than I showed up here as, because I believe that if you have a serious Presidency, if you have ideas and you're willing to work and you're not so pig headed that you think you've got the total truth and you work with other people and you just keep working at it and you're willing to win in inches as well as feet, that a phenomenal amount of positive things can happen. And you always thought that I was trying to have a serious Presidency. That's all I ever wanted.<stop><start>I got pretty pissed off at times.<stop><start>Yes, that was all right. But at least but when you were mad, it was because you thought I was abandoning something I said I would do, that I was trying to do. I never had any my frustration was with the people in your line of work that I thought didn't take all this seriously, that thought it didn't matter one way or the other, that thought it was some game, or who was up or who was down, or where was the power equation, or something. Because it really does matter. There are consequences to the ideas people have. One of the worries I have about this election is all these people writing as if there is no differences and there are no consequences. The American people should make a judgment knowing that there are differences and there are consequences and it matters what you do. The thing that I think the last several years has shown is that a lot of these problems yield to effort. And if you're willing to just put in a few years of effort, you can push a lot of rocks up a lot of hills. People should feel really good about that. One of the things that I hope when I leave office that people will say is, I hope that there will be a greater sense of self confidence about what America can achieve. But it requires you everybody has got to play politics, and I understand all that. I don't want to get sanctimonious about that just because I'm not running for office for the first time in 26 years. That's part of the political system. And everybody will take their shots and do this. But in the end, the Presidency should be informed by a set not just of core principles and core values but ideas that there ought to be an agenda here. People ought to always be trying to get something done. And you shouldn't be deterred by people saying it's not big enough, or it's too big, or all that. There ought to be a broad based view of where the world should go and what the role of the Presidency is in taking America where it should go. And as long as there is, I think our country is going to do pretty well. In that sense, I will leave office phenomenally optimistic. And everything I ever believed about the American people has been confirmed by my experience here. If they have enough time and enough information, no matter how it's thrown at them, in how many pieces and how slanted it is or whether it's inflammatory or whether it's designed to produce sedation, no matter what happens, they nearly always get it right. That's the only reason we're around here after the Founding Fathers were right. Democracy, if given a chance to work, really does. If there's enough time and enough information, the American people nearly always get it right. So, in that sense, I just I'm grateful I've had the chance to serve. I've had the time of my life. I've loved it. Probably good we've got a 22d amendment. If we didn't, I'd probably try to do it for 4 more years. Laughter<stop><start>Well, I'll tell you something turning this off two things. One is, every last campaign I've covered since '92, I found myself judging against that one, in just big ways and little ways. And the other thing I promised my son I'd tell you he's just finishing up his first tour as a foreign service officer in Turkmenistan, and he said his proudest possession is his commission document with your signature on it.<stop><start>Wow. Well, if you go back to that '92 campaign, it just shows you, though the only other thing I would say is, I think I was so advantaged by having been a Governor for 10 years when I started running, or however long I'd been serving, and having had the opportunity to develop these ideas over time and then to measure them against the experience I've had. I still think ideas and organized, concentrated effort mattered. No President with an ambitious agenda will fail to make errors. Things happen in other people's lives. Maybe something will happen to the next President. God knows they won't go through what I did, but maybe their kids will get sick. Things happen in people's lives, and mistakes get made. And sometimes you just make a wrong call. But if you've got if you're serious and you've got a good agenda and you have good people and you work at it in a steady way, you get results. It really is a job like other jobs. That's another thing I think it's important you said something in your letter to me, which I think is true, that maybe we had removed all the mystery around the President<stop><start>I didn't even get a chance to ask that question.<stop><start>and maybe that's not good. And maybe that's not good, but I do believe that we need to demystify the job. It is a job. And if you love your country and you've got something you want to do and you've thought it through and you've put together a good team and you're willing to be relentless and to exhaust yourself in the effort, results will come. That's what I would like the American people to know. They should be very optimistic about this. Diversity<stop><start>You know, they are. They're in such great shape right now. I noticed it traveling around this year. It's not just everybody is getting along, but they appreciate the thing that you always said way back when, which is that diversity is a strength. Sandy was telling me about your first G 7 conference, which I don't expect you to talk about on the record, but he was telling me about how the Japanese were lecturing you about how to run an economy. And when you took office, most people believed that we were going to get taken to the cleaners by the Japanese and the Germans, because they were homogenous and we were mongrels. And now most people you know, most of those Archie Bunkers out in Queens have a niece or a nephew who is dating a Puerto Rican at this point. And most people<stop><start>Or an Indian or a Pakistani. I went to a school in Queens the other day, and I mean, I thought I was there was one guy there, I could swear the kid was from Mongolia. There were a lot of East Asians. There were a lot of South Asians. There were all the Puerto Ricans. There were all the other Latins, you know. But the test that that's not over, but I think people are beginning to feel good about it.<stop><start>Well, I mean, kids my kids' age, your kid's age, think it's a positive value.<stop><start>It is a positive value. It makes life more interesting. I keep telling everybody, the trick is to figure out how to respect all these people's other people's traditions, religions, the whole thing, cherish your own, and then but the only way to make it work, which is why I keep citing this human genome finding that we're 99.9 percent the same, is to realize that the differences make life interesting, but the similarities are fundamental. If you can get people to think that what we have in common is fundamental, but the differences make life more interesting then I think we'll be okay. And I still think that's still the most important thing of all. It's even more important than the right economic policy, because eventually we'll get all that stuff. We'll make mistakes we'll correct it. But if your whole heart and mind and spirit is wrongly turned, then you can do everything else right, and you still come a cropper. You'll have problems. So I really I think this advance in race relations is profoundly important. I'll give you one exhibit A was old Gordon Smith's speech for the hate crimes bill. Did you see that? May 10, 2000<stop><start>Mr. President, thank you for joining us.<stop><start>I'm glad to do it. Permanent Normal Trade Relations With China 2000 Election<stop><start>It looks as though the normalized trade relations with China isn't likely to go through. Would you agree with that?<stop><start>I'm not sure yet.<stop><start>You're still not sure?<stop><start>We don't have the votes yet. I think we'll get the votes, because I think it's the right thing for the country. But I think it will be I won't know for a few days yet.<stop><start>If you do, how might that hurt or help Mr. Gore in his bid for the Presidency?<stop><start>Well, I think that, on balance, it will help him because he's been a very strong supporter of this agreement and, generally, of our trade policy. And even though some of the strongest elements of the Democratic Party and some of our best friends are on the other side of this fight, it shows that he's willing to take an independent stand to do what he believes is right. And I think that's very, very important. I think that's something people will look to. And they might compare that, for example, with Governor Bush's going to Bob Jones University and defending his outreach to Jerry Falwell and the members of the far right in his party, and conclude that our people, the people that we're disagreeing with are good folks, and we're proud to have them as a part of our party we want them to. But we need a President who will make an independent judgment from time to time.<stop><start>So you think it's not going to hurt him?<stop><start>Yes, I think it's a net plus. I think that let me just say this I think the reverse is, it would be a problem for our country. That's the most important thing. I think it would be a big problem for our country if it didn't pass, because it would increase the chance that something bad would happen in that area it would give aid and comfort to the reactionaries in China and it would make it possible for people to question whether the Democrats were running away from our global responsibilities. Right now, that's the burden the Republicans have to bear, because they defeated the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty. They opposed our efforts to lead a global march on ending the testing of nuclear weapons. And I think that was a terrible mistake by them. So it's a problem they'll have to come to grips with. I just don't want to see our party responsible for walking away from another big opportunity and responsibility of the United States. Million Mom March and Gun Safety Legislation<stop><start>The Million Mom March takes place this Sunday. How do you address the concerns of law abiding citizens who own guns, who feel that any additional controls would be an infringement on their personal rights, on their second amendment rights?<stop><start>Well, I just disagree with them. I think that every law abiding gun owner ought to want to keep guns out of the hands of criminals and children and should recognize that no strategy will succeed that doesn't have a lot of prevention. For example, I don't see why any gun owner could possibly object to closing the gun show loophole and the Brady background check. We now know these background checks have kept 500,000 felons, fugitives, and stalkers from buying handguns. I don't see why any law abiding gun owner would object to having a photo ID and a license for anybody buying handguns that proves that, A, you've passed the background check and, B, you've passed a safety training course on a gun. We do that for cars. If you have to get a license to prove you can drive a car and that you're a law abiding citizen and you have to observe seatbelt laws and speed limits, you don't hear people going around complaining about "car control." They don't call it "car control." They call it sensible public safety. I just think we need to look at the specifics of every proposal. Does this keep any law abiding hunter out of the deer woods in deer season? No. Does it keep any law abiding sport shooter away from his or her activities? No. Does it prevent any law abiding gun owner who believes that he'll be safer having a gun in their home from having a gun in their home? No. So if the answers to those questions is no, but it would clearly keep more guns out of the hands of children and criminals, then we ought to be for it, and everybody ought to be for it. That's what I believe. President's Disappointments in Office<stop><start>You've had a number of successes during your administration. The economy is up. Unemployment is down. The crime rate is down. What has been your greatest disappointment or failure?<stop><start>I'm disappointed that we haven't been able to make health care available to all the working families of the country. You know, the very poorest people have health care through the Government Medicaid program. And we have extended health insurance to children of low income working families through the Children's Health Insurance Program, and we're still enrolling more children in that. But I'm very disappointed in that. And I'm disappointed that the two parties in Congress, once we became financially able to do it when we started running surpluses we can save Social Security now for the baby boom generation, and as yet they haven't taken me up on even the easiest part of my proposal, which is to dedicate the savings we will get from paying down the debt, because of the Social Security taxes we pay dedicate those savings from lower interest rates on the debt to the Trust Fund. If we did that, we could take the life of Social Security out to about 2054 just that which would take it beyond the life expectancy of all but the most fortunate baby boomers and get this country over a big hump. Now, I think there are further Social Security reforms that should be enacted, but they'll have to await the election and probably a less hopefully, a less partisan climate. Relations With Republican Congress<stop><start>Of course, from the time you first came into office, there's been this animosity between you and the Republicans in Congress, and some of the Democrats as well. What do you think it is that has created this climate of mistrust between you and the Congress?<stop><start>Well first of all, I disagree that there's very much among the Democrats. I have enjoyed, even in my first 2 years, I got a higher percentage of Democratic support for my programs than Presidents Johnson and Carter did, and Kennedy, as an historical fact. We didn't lose many Democrats. You always lose some just disagree with you. So they've been quite good to me. I think what happened is, I had more partisan opposition than at any time in history, and I think there were two causes. I think some Republicans thought that the Democratic majority in Congress had been too hard on their Presidents, and so they thought it was payback time. I think there was some of that. But the overwhelming reason is that they resented the fact that they didn't have the White House. They thought that they owned the White House, and they thought they had found a formula that would always keep Democrats out of the White House. They would say we couldn't be trusted on the economy and foreign policy and national defense and welfare and crime, and we were going to tax people to death, and all the things they always said. And when it didn't work, I think they were very angry. And they decided that they would oppose me at every turn and in every way. I've had many of them come up to me and tell me that that's what they did. It was about power. It wasn't about all these things, and it had nothing to do with oh, some of them may have very strong personal adverse feelings, but they're basically rooted in they thought that they owned the White House. And the people own the White House. I don't own it. The Democrats don't own it, either. But I think that's really what drove it. And I certainly hope that after this next election that they will moderate their conduct. But we'll just have to see. I don't personally have you know, I worked with all these people. And I've worked with them, and I think it's important to point out that in spite of all the partisan animosity, we have gotten a great deal done here. We passed the Balanced Budget Act together. We passed welfare reform together. We passed the bill to put 100,000 teachers in the schools together and a lot of other really big we passed financial services reform, telecommunications reform. We got a lot done together because, in the end, if we keep working in the end, to get anything done, we have to work together. And I'd keep thinking, this is easing off, and we're making improvements. I have a lot of people that I have very good relationships with in the Republican caucus, and I will continue to just try to bring more of them around to the idea that we should all be in the business of governing. We have these elections on a regular basis, and before you know it, we have another one, and before you know it, there's a new crowd in town. And it's a terrible waste of energy to spend all your time in partisan fights. The thing that I'm most discouraged about right now is that the Senate has been here since January and has only approved 11 of my proposed appointments. I've got over 250 proposed appointments up there. And they can say, "Well, this always happens in an election year." That's simply not true. If you look at it's true that the appointments process slows down in election years if you have a President of one party and a Senate of another. It slows down. But it doesn't come to a grinding halt like they're doing now. And again, this is about political power. But it's not good for the taxpayers. It's not good for the public interest. And I hope that I'll be able to persuade the Senate to resume fulfilling their constitutional responsibility to act on these appointments. And they ought to vote against them if they don't like them.<stop><start>There seemed to have been some personal animosity against you, personally, right from the start, before you left Arkansas.<stop><start>Yes, I think there was. But it was rooted in there's a new book out by Joe Conason and Gene Lyons called "The Hunting of the President" that explains what it was about. It was, they were afraid I was going to win. And they thought it would upset their automatic hold on the White House and their little formula. Maybe they didn't like me, but I think mostly what they didn't like was the prospect that they wouldn't win the White House forever and ever and ever. I think it's not too much to say that before the '92 election, they really thought they had found a formula and there would never be another Democratic President, not for a long, long, long time, that maybe a third party would have to come up before they'd ever be challenged. And it made them very angry. And I kept telling them that politics is about ideas and action. We've got elections all the time nobody stays around forever. They need to relax and have a good time and go to work. Whenever they did, we got a lot done. We got a lot done together. I enjoyed working with them. But I think, to me, spending your time on personal animosity is highly counterproductive. Life is too short for that. Impact of 2000 Election<stop><start>How and to what extent do you think the character and the goals of the Federal Government might change if either George Bush or Al Gore is elected in November?<stop><start>Well, I think both the nature and the goals will change. I think if the Vice President regardless, because the country is changing. And the environment in which our people live and, therefore, in which our Government operates will change. I think if the Vice President is elected, he will do what he said he would do, which is to stay with the economic policy that has brought us this unprecedented prosperity, but to modernize it. I think he will implement his keep paying down the debt. He will continue to try to do more for the poor areas of our country and the cities and the rural areas that have been left behind. And I think he will try to save enough money to make sure we protect Social Security and Medicare and reform it for the baby boom generation and to continue to invest in education. So I think that's what he'll do. If Governor Bush gets elected, I think he'll do what he said he would do. I think it's not necessary to attack these people personally. I mean, most people do what they say they're going to do. And what Governor Bush said he was going to do is have a tax cut much bigger than the one I vetoed before, defense increases bigger than the ones that I proposed, and vouchers for our schools. And I believe if that happens, we'll basically be back to the Reagan Bush economic philosophy, which is cut the revenues of the Government, even if it means going back to deficits and higher interest rates. And it will mean that we won't have much money left over to invest in education or the environment or health care. That's what they've but I think you have to just look at what they say they're going to do and ask yourself what the consequences are. I think if Al Gore gets elected, he'll try to grow the economy and keep cleaning up the environment. I think if Governor Bush gets elected, he will do what he did in Texas. He will let the people who basically are the primary polluters control environmental policy. That's what he did in Texas. He got rid of all the environmental commissioners, appointed someone who represented the chemical industry, someone from the Farm Bureau, and someone who was a political activist. I think but that's what they we shouldn't be surprised if people do what they say they'll do. I think that the next President will get two to four appointments to the Supreme Court. So I think if the Vice President gets elected, he'll continue to appoint diverse judges who are committed to individual liberties and basically in the mainstream of American constitutional history, the way I've tried to do. And I think if Governor Bush gets elected, he'll appoint judges more like the ones appointed by the previous Reagan and Bush administrations. And if they get two to four appointments on the Supreme Court, I think Roe v. Wade will be repealed, and a lot of other things that have been a part of the fabric of our constitutional life will be gone. Because and again, I just think just look at what these people say they believe, both candidates, what they say they're going to do and assume that they will do it. There's been a lot of studies which show that, by and large, people who get elected President do what they say they're going to do.<stop><start>What about foreign policy, and the question of how the two might deal differently with issues of foreign policy?<stop><start>Well, the Vice President has a big advantage in the sense that he has worked on this for not only 8 years as Vice President, where he's had a major role in issues affecting our nuclear security and issues affecting biological and chemical warfare and our relationship with Russia, our relationship with South Africa, our relationship in the Middle East. So he's got a rich, real history here. Governor Bush, like me when I got elected, is Governor, and he served far less time than I did as Governor. But he would say, I'm sure if he were here, "But my father was President, and I know all these big time Republicans, and they're all for me. So I can get them all to come and give me good advice." And so I think, again, the best thing to do is to say that on the question of experience and record, I think the Vice President has the better claim there. But I'm more concerned about the positions that Governor Bush has taken because, again, I think you have to assume these candidates are honorable people and they will do what they say. He's opposed to the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, and he says that he wants to build a much bigger missile defense system than the evidence warrants right now it may support it later no matter what the consequences are to the efforts we're making to reduce the nuclear weapons threat around the world. So I think that, you know, that gives me some pause. I think that's troublesome, because it could cause the country a lot of trouble in the next 4 or 5 years. And he says that's where he says he is, and so I assume he I believe he believes that. President's Role in the Democratic Party<stop><start>Mr. President, as your time here in the White House winds down, what role do you see for yourself in the Democratic Party now?<stop><start>You mean, right now, or in the future? Right now?<stop><start>Right now.<stop><start>First of all, I'm trying to help as many of our candidates as possible. I'm trying to help as many of our candidates for the Senate and the House of Representatives. I will do whatever I can to help the Vice President in the fall. I will try to make sure that our side has enough funds to compete with the Republicans. They will have more money as they always do, but I think we've got a better message, and so I think if we've got enough money to get our message out, we'll be fine. So I expect to work on all that. I remember in '98, they outspent us by 100 million, and we still won seats in the House because we had a good message. We said we were for 100,000 teachers in our schools, and we were for modernizing our school facilities. We were for a Patients' Bill of Rights. We had a good specific set of things we were for. And we will in the fall. And so I'm going to do my best to just be a messenger for that and support other people. That's what I'm doing. I'm not a candidate anymore, so I get to go back to being a good citizen and be supportive of other people. President's Future Plans<stop><start>And what are you going to do as a good citizen after you leave the White House?<stop><start>Well, I haven't decided yet. In terms of any income earning activities I might undertake, I think that it's premature for me to deal with that, because I need to wait as long as I possibly can certainly until after the election and, if possible, when I leave office, to make final decisions on that. I intend to write a book. I intend to maintain my activities in areas that I care a lot about around the world, in supporting the peaceful resolution of racial and religious and ethnic conflicts, supporting my initiatives when I'm gone from office to provide economic empowerment to poor people at home and around the world. I'm interested very much in our continuing efforts to meet the challenge of global warming, which I think will dominate a lot of our concerns for the next 20 to 30 years. So those are just three things I want to be involved in. And then I've got to build a library and a museum and a public policy center in Arkansas<stop><start>Where are you going to live?<stop><start>Well, I'm going to live in New York with my wife, and then I'm going to be in Arkansas a few days a week while I'm building the library and museum. We're going to build an apartment there, so that I'll have a place there and a place in New York. So I expect to be back and forth between the two places and then traveling around a little bit. You know, I'll find something useful to do. I've never every stage of my life I've always enjoyed. I've had a good time, and I'm not I love this job. I'd do it forever if I could. But I'm not apprehensive, exactly, about what I'll do when I'm gone. I'll just have to think about it, and I don't want to spend too much time thinking about it while I'm here, because I'm trying to squeeze every last drop out of every minute I've got to be President. Memorable Aspects of the Presidency<stop><start>But you know, at the White House Correspondents' dinner, you certainly received a lot of acclaim as a wonderful comedian. I was in the audience, but there certainly seemed to be a little bit of wistfulness in your presentation. What are you going to miss most about being here?<stop><start>The job. The work. That's what I'll miss most. I'll miss the opportunity every day to push an agenda that I think is good for America and ordinary citizens and the future of this country. I will miss that terribly, because I love this work. I just love it. I will miss the people. I will miss living in the White House. The people who work here are wonderful, and it's a great place to live. I'll miss working in this beautiful office we're sitting in now. It's the most beautiful place I've ever worked. Because of the shape of the room and the size of the windows, there's always light here, even when it's raining outside. I'll miss Camp David. I'll miss the Marine Band. I'll miss flying on Air Force One. I'll miss a lot of things. But the thing I'll miss more than anything else is the chance to do this work for the American people every day. It is a joy. I've spent a lot of time since I've been here reading histories of other administrations, both ones that are very well known and those that aren't. And I'm amazed at how many people, beginning with George Washington, complained about how hard it was to be President and how all their motives were suspect. George Washington said, once he got to be President, people treated him like he was a common criminal. Laughter And of course, in the beginning of the country, the politics was about as rough as it is now. The three periods which have been most partisan were, in the beginning, Jefferson and Adams, and then around the Civil War, and this time we're living through now. But a lot of people referred to Harry Truman referred to the White House as a great white prison and all that, you know. And if they were serious, I must say I just disagree with them. I think and I've had a pretty rough time here, but it's still it's just part of the costs of doing business. And I think the job is a joy. I mean, it's just a gift to be able to do this kind of work. I've just loved it. Family Life in the White House<stop><start>What does 8 years in the White House do to a marriage?<stop><start>Oh, I think it's been good for ours, because I got to live above the store. You know, until Hillary started running for the Senate, we actually probably had more time together than we did previously. And of course, in the early years our daughter was finishing up junior high school and high school, and we were together at night a lot. You know, we talked about her schoolwork and what was going on in her life, and that was a lot of fun for us. Then, after Chelsea left and went off to college, we were able to go to Camp David more. This is really quite a wonderful place to live. It's a great place to there's a swimming pool here, and Hillary and I spent a lot of happy days out there just talking and reading, or on Sunday afternoons up on the Truman balcony. I mean, you can get busy and drift apart, I guess, in any circumstances. But for us, we worked hard before we got here, and we had a lot of things to do, and we've probably had more time together in our time here than at any point in our marriage. And I've enjoyed that immensely. It's been wonderful for us. Outlook for the Future<stop><start>Looking ahead, when Chelsea is 50, what kind of a world is she going to see? Is it going to be better or worse than it is today?<stop><start>I think it will be better. No one can foresee the future, but I believe it will be. I think that it will be a world in which, first of all, the average life expectancy will be bumping 100 years, because of the human genome discoveries and all the things that will happen. I think the world will be even smaller than it is now and that the ability to collapse time and space through travel and the Internet will be greater. I think that our familiarity with, understanding of different cultures and religions and racial groupings will be greater. And I think we will be a much more polyglot society, and I think we'll be much more comfortable with it.<stop><start>So you're optimistic.<stop><start>I'm very optimistic. I think the problems that we will have will be the flip side of the positive changes. That is, I think that the likelihood is that the security problems over the next 30 years that's what you asked me about will be from we may have a conflict with other nations. I hope we won't. That's one of the reasons I hope this China initiative will pass. I hope we won't, but I think it's virtually certain that there will be kind of a global rough alliance between the terrorists, the gunrunners, the narcotraffickers, the organized criminals. I think it's virtually certain that the technological advances which may allow us to put computers and DNA strands together in a way that are exponentially powerful may make it possible for the bad guys to have very small I mean, less than the palm of your hand sized chemical, biological, and nuclear weapons. We don't know. So we're going to have and I think the enemies of the nation state, the enemies of the ordered society, under the guise of religious or ideological causes or maybe just making their purses bigger, will probably be a bigger security threat 20 to 30 years from now than other nations will be to America and to others. I think that we will unless we're prepared to have a much bleaker future, two big challenges we'll have to take on beyond our borders are global warming, which if we don't deal with it is going to be very serious, and we'll also have to view global public health problems as our own. We've got to roll back the AIDS crisis, and we've got to deal with malaria. We've got to deal with TB in Africa and other places around the world. And we have to keep working until every child in the world has access to clean water. We still lose as many kids from dysentery and diarrhea and just basically poison polluted water as we do to these diseases every year. So I think that Americans will be much more in tune to all that and feel much more immediately affected by what goes on in Africa or Southeast Asia or the Indian subcontinent or other places, than they do today. President's Faith<stop><start>I have one last question. What is your concept of God, and how has that belief influenced your Presidency?<stop><start>Well, I believe in a God who is both a Creator, who created the world, who oversees the world, and who has provided an eternal existence for human beings. I believe in the eternal life of the soul. And I think that that has helped me a lot. It's given me a lot of perspective. It's given me a lot of ability to withstand the bad times, to believe that I could overcome my own shortcomings, to understand why I had to forgive people that I thought were being unfair to me, just as I asked them to forgive me, and basically to keep my eyes on the bigger things in life and to keep trying to grow personally, even as I was trying to do this job for the American people. It's very important to me. And I think if you have a concept of the eternity of the human spirit, I think, as the creation of God, I think it makes it a lot easier to live with whatever happens. It keeps your head on straight when things are going well and keeps your back up and your spirits high when things are going poorly. See that rock there? I always tell people this story. That rock came off the Moon. Neil Armstrong picked that off the Moon in 1969, and he brought it to me last year for the 30th anniversary of the Moon walk. It's a vacuum packed rock. And it's been carbon dated at 3.6 billion years old. Now, when people come in here and they get real mad at me or they're real upset about something, sometimes I say, "See that rock? It's 3.6 billion years old. We're all just passing through here. Chill out. It's going to be all right." Laughter Presidents need things that help them stay centered and keep perspective. It's very bad to think about yourself very much in this job. I don't mean in quiet moments, in reading, trying to build your personal life I don't mean that. But I mean, most of the time when people attack you, it's just part of the job. They're supposed to. That's part of the deal. Presidents need devices, routines, systems, reminders, and friends and family to keep their focus on the American people. Because you're just here for a little while, and if you get all caught up in the things you started asking me about, the personal animosities and the partisan fights and all that, then you basically give a victory to your adversaries by letting them define how you spend your time and how you shape your feelings. I used to tell the young people here that our job was to do the job we came here to do for the American people. Their job, they thought, was to stop us from doing our job. They could only win if we helped them by letting them get inside our heads and our hearts. And if we just kind of kept focused on what we came here to do, it was probably going to work out all right. So far it has.<stop><start>Thank you, Mr. President.<stop><start>Thank you. March 21, 2000 India Pakistan Dispute Over Kashmir<stop><start>Prime Minister Vajpayee said that you will conclude, now that you're here, that the situation Kashmir, between India and Pakistan is not as bad as they say it is. Is that what you conclude?<stop><start>Well, I think that I've concluded that he is going to do everything he can to avoid having it escalate into a war with Pakistan. And that is encouraging. But I still think it's a difficult situation, to say the least. I think it's important that they both show restraint. I think it's important that they respect the Line of Control, both sides do. And then, over the long run, I think what really matters, in terms of an ultimate resolution, is that the people of Kashmir feel that their legitimate interests are being addressed in some formal fashion. But I do feel better about his determination to avoid a war, at least what you might call a full scale war. But I don't I'm still very troubled by the fact there's so much violence there. A lot of it obviously is propagated beyond the borders of Kashmir, and I don't think the Line of Control is adequately respected. And I think you know, what happened at Kargil was very troubling to me, because I supported strongly the dialog between India and Pakistan in the Lahore process. I still think it's a difficult situation, and I don't think they should take it lightly, either side.<stop><start>Moreover, Prime Minister Vajpayee is much more militant with the Indian press than he was with you today.<stop><start>That's good, though. That means that maybe that means my trip here has a beneficial impact. And I hope I can have some impact on the Pakistanis when I go there.<stop><start>What do you mean by "impact," Mr. President?<stop><start>You know, I spent last July 4th trying to persuade former Prime Minister Sharif to withdraw back behind the Line of Control. He did. I think it weakened him when he did, frankly, but it was the right thing to do. I think that they these countries need to be thinking about reducing violence and increasing cooperation and dialog and freeing up their immensely talented people for different pursuits. If you look at how well the Indians and the Pakistani Americans have done, how well they're doing in the information economy in the United States, how well they're beginning to do here, it's truly a tragedy that they're basically trapped in this position which, even if it doesn't lead to war, leads to big expenses on defense, which could be spent on education and health care or the development of a modern economy. So I hope that my trip here and the longterm rekindling of the relationship with India that I'm committed to for our country can basically, slowly, over time, take this in a different direction.<stop><start>Forgive me for being more pointed. You know as well as I do that you're talking, to a very large extent, in generalities. What do you think the United States can really do here, especially given the fact that the Indians say the United States has no role?<stop><start>Well, I think that what they say is that we have no role in Kashmir. And they have every right to say that. Every place in the world I've been involved in the peace process you know, it's because we have been able to inspire the confidence and have a relationship with both parties. But I think the United States does have an interest in trying to avert a larger conflict and trying to reduce the tensions between the two countries. I think we do have a clear interest there.<stop><start>So?<stop><start>We've worked with the Pakistanis for years. We want it and obviously we've got a big interest in India's future. So therefore, I think anything I can do to get them to focus on what it would take to reduce the tensions is important. And I think right now the important thing is respecting the Line of Control, reducing violence, and find a way to resume the dialog. Now, beyond that, it's up to them.<stop><start>You'll tell the Pakistanis they should respect the Line of Control, the de facto cease fire line?<stop><start>Absolutely.<stop><start>And what will you tell those Kashmiris, or Pakistanis, who believe they're fighting to free the Muslim Kashmiris from Indian control?<stop><start>First of all, I think that the same thing I said to the Indians. I don't think there can be a military solution to Kashmir. And the tangled history of it does not admit of a simple solution. I think that the best chance that the Pakistanis have, if they want to have a positive impact on what they believe the legitimate concerns of people who live in that part of Kashmir that's in India, is through a dialog, not through acts of violence and supporting acts of violence. And I think for many years they thought that might get us involved, and it won't. I'm not going to be dragged into something that first of all, that India doesn't want us to be part of and, secondly, that I got dragged into from deliberate acts of violence. I just don't think that's right.<stop><start>So what is America's Kashmir policy?<stop><start>Our policy is First, respect the Line of Control second, do not promote violence by third parties in Kashmir third, negotiate and fourth, with respect to India, that there's not a military solution to Kashmir's problems by India, either, that the Kashmiris deserve to have their own concerns addressed on the merits. But I don't think we ought to get in the position of saying that we think that an ethnically diverse country like India can't exist anymore. I don't agree with that.<stop><start>Do you support the Kashmiris' right to a referendum on their own independence? Do you support the right as it was laid out by the United Nations in 1948, for them to have a plebiscite on their future?<stop><start>Well, there's been a lot of changes since 1948, including what happened in 1971 and a number of things since. What I support is I support some process by which the Kashmiris' legitimate grievances are addressed, and I support respecting the Line of Control. And I think the Pakistanis and the Indians have to have some way of talking about it. And the Indians have to have some way of talking to their own Kashmiris about it that recognizes there's not a military solution. But the most I can do right now is to oppose violence, particularly oppose violence propagated by third parties within Kashmir, and to support reaffirming the Line of Control. And Prime Minister Vajpayee just said today that if the Pakistanis would reaffirm the principles of the Lahore Declaration and not promote or support violence on the other side of the Line of Control and respect the Line of Control, that he thought a dialog could be resumed. I think that is the best hope, ultimately, for resolving this.<stop><start>Who are these third parties you're referring to, involved in Kashmir?<stop><start>Well, we know that there have been instances of violence within Kashmir that were propagated by people who were not from there, but they weren't necessarily elements of the Pakistani Government. I don't want to accuse Pakistan of something it didn't do.<stop><start>Do you believe the Pakistan Intelligence Service facilitates the infiltration of fighters to Kashmir?<stop><start>I believe that there are elements within the Pakistani Government that have supported those who engaged in violence in Kashmir.<stop><start>And what will you tell General Musharraf about that?<stop><start>Just exactly what I said to you. And I want to talk with him, as I did with Prime Minister Vajpayee, about the future. I think that in order to get out of a fix when you get into a fix like this and you feel paralyzed by your past practices, the only way to change it is to have a vision of the future which convinces you that if you want to achieve a certain goal, you've got to do it in a different way. And I'll do my best to persuade him of that. I just don't think that this is the way to deal with Kashmir, and I don't think it's a good enough reason to drive, in effect, the whole existence, the whole policy of the Pakistani Government. The Pakistanis are great people, too. They've been good allies of ours. They've helped us even in my time, since the end of the cold war, to get terrorists, the terrorists involved one involved in the World Trade Center, one involved in the CIA killing. They've helped us in other contexts. I want to continue to be a good ally for them. But I think they have to have a plan for restoring democracy, and they have to have a nonviolent plan for resolving their differences with India.<stop><start>Just so I understand, then, Mr. President, you want the United States on the sidelines in this, giving advice but not involved in any three way attempt to settle the Kashmir issue?<stop><start>I don't think the United States can be involved in a three way attempt to settle the Kashmir issue, unless and until they both want us. I think that that is the evidence you know, if you look at, we're in the Middle East because they both want us, not to say that either side agrees with everything I say and do, but we have a certain credibility there born of years and years and years of labor and a welcoming into the process. The same thing is true in the Irish peace process. So I think that right now what I need to do is to try to convince both sides to avoid the worst and there's something to be said for avoiding the worst here and then to adopt some common principles which will allow the resumption of the dialog. If we can get them to renounce violence as a way of resolving this and to restore their dialog, respect the Line of Control so the dialog can be restored, then who knows what will happen and what they decide to do and how they decide to do it. But if they stay sort of hunkered down in unapproachable positions, then I think we'll have to work very hard to avoid a more difficult situation. Nuclear Proliferation in South Asia<stop><start>I have a nuclear question. The United States tells people in the rest of the world to be like us. And the Indians say, "Right. We're just like you. We're a democracy. We're a free market economy, and we have nuclear weapons in order to protect our national security." What's wrong with that?<stop><start>Well, what's wrong with it is that we're trying to lead the world away from nuclear power and away from the threat of nuclear war. And when the Indians took this position, they basically said, "We don't think we can be secure without nuclear weapons, and it's our right as a great nation to have them." And we, first of all, don't believe it does we don't believe it enhances their security. We think countries like Brazil, Argentina, South Africa, South Korea, that walked away from the prospect of nuclear programs, are more secure and have more funds to support their own national security and the development of their people and their economy. And we believe that it sends a bad signal when a great democracy like India, in effect, is telling the world that we ought to get into another arms race. I've tried to reduce the arms of the United States. I hope this year we'll make another effort to reduce the arms of the United States and the arms of Russia. I've tried to support the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, the Non Proliferation Treaty, the restriction of the distribution of fissile material. So I think India it sounds great to say, "Well, the United States has nuclear weapons, and they're a democracy. We ought to." But if you look at the whole history of this thing, what they're saying is, "We want to reverse the move toward reducing the nuclear threat because we say we ought to have nuclear weapons."<stop><start>Well, they also say, sir, that these are weapons of self esteem and this is a U.S.<stop><start>Self esteem, that's right. If they're weapons of self esteem for India, then every nation in the entire world has the same right to self esteem. So therefore, however many countries there are in the world, everyone that can afford one ought to have a nuclear weapon. I do not believe that that would make the world safer. I believe that that would make the world more dangerous. So I respect what the Indians say. They say, "Look, it's not just Pakistan. China has nuclear weapons. You know, it wasn't so many decades ago we had a border war with China. We have our problems there." But I think that most people believe and have studied this believe that all nations would be more secure if we reduce the overall nuclear threat and reduce the number of people that had access to nuclear weapons. And also keep in mind, the more nuclear weapons you have, the more nuclear material you have, the more risk you have that that nuclear material will be subject to pilfering. So you have to worry about not only about other states becoming nuclear states but even terrorists getting ahold of small scale nuclear weapons. I just think that it takes the world in the wrong direction. It's an honest disagreement we have with the Indians.<stop><start>Yes, because the Indians say to you, "You Americans say well, you just don't trust us"<stop><start>That's not true.<stop><start>"It's okay for you, but you don't trust us."<stop><start>No, that's not true. Actually, I do trust them. I believe Prime Minister Vajpayee when he says, "I will never be the first to use nuclear weapons." So it's not a question of trust. What I don't agree with is that a country needs nuclear weapons to manifest its esteem or its national greatness. Nor do I agree that India is actually more secure with these nuclear weapons. I think that in some ways it reduces one's security.<stop><start>Trust the Pakistanis with control of nuclear weapons, too?<stop><start>I feel the same way about them. I think they probably think they have a better argument since they know they couldn't win a conventional war with India, because India is so much bigger and because Lahore, for example, one of the most important places, is so close to the Indian border. But it just seems to me again, if you look at if you ask yourself, where is there greater security? In Brazil, in Argentina, or even in South Africa, or even in South Korea, where they renounced nuclear weapons? Are those people less secure than the people of Pakistan and India? I think you would have to say they are not less secure. So my argument is, any country can say to us, any country, particularly another democracy, "Oh, you're a hypocrite. You've got nuclear weapons. You don't want us to have any." Well, I'm trying to reduce the store of nuclear weapons the United States has, the store Russia has. The Russians have supported this. And we're trying to make the world more stable. I just think I don't think they're more secure by having nuclear weapons. Cancellation of Visit to Joypura, Bangladesh<stop><start>On the subject of security, I'm really curious. You travel all the time in this extraordinarily tight security envelope. And yet, it wasn't secure enough yesterday to go to a small village in Bangladesh. Did you really feel a personal risk in Bangladesh? Did you end up telling Chelsea, or, if you talked to her, Mrs. Clinton, "I'm going off on a trip in which I am at personal risk"?<stop><start>Well, I think it's better for me not to discuss it, except to say this. Insofar as there was a risk, it had nothing to do with the Bangladeshis, nothing to do with the Government or the people of Bangladesh, and they were not in any way at fault. I did my best to take account of the analysis of our security people and to act accordingly, and it worked out just fine. We had a wonderful trip. President's Security<stop><start>Do you ever have your way with the security people?<stop><start>Do you mean, do I ever disagree with them?<stop><start>No. Do you ever have your way?<stop><start>What do you mean?<stop><start>In other ways, do you ever have your you can disagree with them do you ever prevail?<stop><start>Sometimes I do. I have from time to time disagreed with them and actually done what I wanted to do. But when that happens, I try to do it the way they want to do it, because if I disagree with them, I realize I've assumed a greater risk, and I should do it in the way they want to do it. Middle East Peace Process<stop><start>Last question, sir. You're going to see President Asad in Geneva on Sunday. That's a pretty big meeting. Does this mean a deal is close?<stop><start>I wouldn't say that. But I will say this. Ever since they met in Shepherdstown the first of the year, and then the talks sort of were stalled, I've been working very hard with both sides. I now think I'm in a position to have a sense of what it will take for both sides to get an agreement. So it's an appropriate time for me to discuss this with President Asad, in the hope that we can start the talks again. I'm encouraged by the decisions that have been made by the Israelis and the Palestinians. I think they are committed to going forward, and they have a pretty good timetable. They're going to have to work hard to make it. And I think that the only way we'll ever have this thing the way it ought to be in the Middle East is to finish with the Syrians and then with the Lebanese, as well. So I think this is time. Whether it will lead to a breakthrough, I don't know. I hope it will lead to a resumption of talks.<stop><start>Is it safe to assume that President Asad doesn't leave the country easily and would not agree to go to Geneva to see you were you not to have something pretty good to offer?<stop><start>I think it's safe to assume that I wouldn't waste his time, either. I think that we have it's time for us to talk about what we think it would take to resume these talks and move to a resolution. And I'm going to give him my honest opinion about where we are and where I think we can go. And then we just need to make a decision, all of us, about whether to go forward. But principally, it's a decision for the Israelis and the Syrians.<stop><start>Does this involve a comprehensive settlement, one that involves the Syrian Golan Heights, the Israelis, and the Israeli withdrawal from Lebanon?<stop><start>Well, I want to talk to President Asad. There isn't an agreement, yet. But if there is an agreement, I would hope it would lead to a resolution of both the Syrian issues and the Lebanese issues, which is very important in Israel. The Israelis care a lot about that, and well they should. And of course, the Lebanese do. We'll see. Keep your fingers crossed<stop><start>You're enthusiastic.<stop><start>I'm hopeful. February 14, 2000 2000 Presidential Election<stop><start>Thank you very much, Lou. We are in the Oval Office here with President Clinton. Mr. Clinton, thank you so much for doing this historic, first ever on line news interview with CNN.com. I just want to set the scene for you and for our audience. This is not only being put forward on CNN.com and other Internet users, but also it will be seen simultaneously on CNN and CNN International. Fifteen minutes after we're completed, there will be an on line video that people will be able to see, whenever, if they missed it. There will also be a transcript. They will be able to stream and see this as it goes on, on the Internet. So it's a historic moment for the new technology. I know you've been fascinated by this, so let's get right at it. We have some E mail questions. First one from Frank Williams in Tinley Park, Illinois Mr. President, understandably, you're supporting the Presidential candidacy of Vice President Al Gore. But please share your personal political opinions of Senator John McCain and Governor George W. Bush.<stop><start>I think I should pass on that. I think I've tried to stay out of this Presidential election. I'm not a candidate, and I don't think any headlines that I make should interfere with the ability of Senator McCain or Governor Bush to make their point. They're going to have an election in South Carolina, and then they'll go on to other States. And I think that and at some point it might become appropriate for me to say something, maybe at the Democratic Convention or something, or if they make a specific statement about my administration or my record. But I really believe that the American people this is their year, their time. And I am going to vote for the Vice President, and I do support him, because I think he's been the best Vice President in our history by far. And I think he's got a good program for the American people, and I know him to be a good man who will make good decisions. But I just don't think I should get in the middle of this Presidential race. It only interferes with the voters' ability to draw their own conclusions. And I trust them they almost always get it right.<stop><start>But you do know Senator McCain and Governor Bush?<stop><start>Sure.<stop><start>You've met them, and you have your own opinions of both of them.<stop><start>I do, and I follow this campaign closely. I'm interested. It's the first time in over 20 years when I've just been an onlooker, so it's been fascinating to me as a citizen. But I don't think that I should say anything right now. And I don't mean to dodge the gentleman's question, but I just think that anything I do would only complicate their lives. And they're making their case to the people, and they're arguing with each other as they should be. And that's the way it ought to be done right now. Hillary Clinton's Senate Campaign<stop><start>All right, we have another Email question from Peggy Brown Do you find it difficult, Mr. President, watching, listening to criticisms of the First Lady as she attempts to capture the Senate seat in New York?<stop><start>Sure. I mean, of course, I do. I now know how she felt all those years. You know, I love her very much, and I think I know her better than anybody else, and I believe she'd be a great public official. And I hope the people of New York will put her to work. But if she's criticized, particularly if somebody says something I know is flatout wrong, it drives me nuts. I want to be able to say, "Gosh, I wish I could answer that one." Middle East Peace Process<stop><start>All right. We have a chat room that's going on even as we speak right now. There's a question from one person Are you optimistic, Mr. President, about the future for Middle East peace?<stop><start>Yes, I am. This is we're in a little tough patch right now, because a lot of things are going on in the Middle East, the trouble in Lebanon right now. And we're down to the last strokes, if you will. We're down to the hard decisions. But I believe it is so clearly in the interests of the long term security of Israel and the long term interests of the Palestinians and the Syrians and the Lebanese to have a comprehensive peace. And I think we're so close on the substance that I am optimistic. Now, it will require courage. And it will require courage not just by the leaders, but the people of those countries have to recognize that you cannot make peace unless you're willing to give as well as to get. But they ought to do it, and they ought to do it sooner rather than later. I think that the longer you delay something like this, when you have a moment of opportunity, the more you put it at risk. But I am basically optimistic.<stop><start>You've invested a lot of your personal time and energy in the Israeli Palestinian and the Israeli Syrian peace process. Is it time for you, once again, to personally get involved and bring the parties together, do something to make sure this opportunity is not lost?<stop><start>Well, I am personally involved, even when I'm not in a public way. I'm always on the phone, always working this issue. But I think that there will have to be some forward progress here in the next few weeks, and I'll do whatever I can to facilitate it in whatever way I can. But beyond that, I don't want to say anything right now. We're working it, and the parties are working it. Internet Security<stop><start>Okay. Let's take another question from an E mail that we received Do you think, Mr. President, the Federal Government could do more for Internet security? I know you have a big conference, a big meeting coming up here at the White House tomorrow to deal with this sensitive issue, especially given the hacker problem that we saw in the last few weeks.<stop><start>Well, the short answer to that is, we probably can. And I'm bringing in a group of people to meet with me tomorrow, a lot of people from the high tech community and from all our Government agencies. These denial of service attacks are obviously very disturbing, and I think there is a way that we can clearly promote security. I think it's important that the American people not overreact to this. That is, we're into a whole new world with the Internet, and whenever we sort of cross another plateau in our development, there are those who seek to take advantage of it. So this is a replay of things that have happened throughout our history, and we'll figure out how to do it and go forward. But I think on balance, no one could dispute what a great thing the Internet has been for our country and for the world. There are now over 200 million people that use it every day, about half of them here in the United States. And we just need to keep pushing it. National Economy<stop><start>And we're using it right now. Let's take another question from our chat room, from our CNN.com chat room Mr. President, how will you advise Vice President Gore to keep this economy growing?<stop><start>Well, I think he's got a pretty good idea because he's been here with us and has been part of all the decisions that have been made the last 7 years. But if you look at where we are, the question is we have the longest economic expansion in history how do we keep it going? I think we need to remember the fundamentals. We need to keep the debt being paid down, because that allows people in the private sector to borrow money not only to invest in new businesses or in their existing business but also to purchase things. So the continuing debt repayment is important. Keeping our markets open, to make us competitive and keep inflation down, is important. Investing in science and technology and research and in education and training and closing the digital divide to make sure access to the Internet is available to all Americans, those are the kinds of things that will keep this economy going. Especially, I would say, we have both the moral obligation and an economic opportunity by increasing investment in the areas which have been not so helped by the economic recovery, in the Indian reservations, the inner city communities, the rural communities where there haven't been a lot of new jobs. If you get growth there, it is by definition noninflationary, because you get they haven't had much. So you can lower the unemployment rate there, and you create new businesses, new employees, and new consumers at the same time.<stop><start>Mr. President, there's another Email question that we have How would you respond to arguments that you personally have had very little to do with the economic boom that the country has experienced during your administration?<stop><start>Well, I would respond by asking them to remember what it was like before we announced and implemented our deficit reduction plan and remember what a direct impact that had on interest rates, on investment, and on the stock market. The American people deserve the lion's share of the credit. The high tech community we're part of it today they deserve a lot of the credit. High technology companies employ only 8 percent of our people they're responsible for 30 percent of our growth. The companies that restructured in the eighties deserve a lot of credit. Everybody who's kept our markets open, guaranteeing low inflation and more competition, they deserve a lot of credit. But nonetheless, we had a completely jobless recovery, what some people called a "triple dip" economy, until we finally said we're going to do something about this deficit. And when we did it, it was like breaking a dam, and the interest rates came down, and people started being able to get money and investing at an unprecedented rate, and the stock market started its upward march. So I think the critical things we did we had a good fiscal policy we had a good policy on the markets and we had a good policy on investing in technology and in people and education and training. And I don't think there's any question that had we not taken that first big bite out of the deficit, then the growth would have been much slower than it has been.<stop><start>Okay. I guess the person asking this question was also suggesting that the Republicans in Congress, Alan Greenspan, and the Internet economy, all of that combined to help you.<stop><start>And I agree with that. I agree. I think Chairman Greenspan did a good job. The main thing he's done, that I think he deserves a lot of credit for, is that he has been able to look at the evidence of the new economy and act on the evidence, instead of what you might call the old theology. Otherwise, he could have killed this recovery by raising interest rates too much too frequently in the past. I think the Republicans in Congress not a one of them voted for the economic plan in '93. But we did have a bipartisan majority in both Houses in '97 for the Balanced Budget Act, which continued what we were doing, and they deserve credit for that. And I have never I try never to deny anybody else credit. This is an American achievement, not just mine. But if we hadn't taken that first big bite out of the deficit, I don't think we'd be where we are today. Situation in Chechnya<stop><start>All right, Mr. President, we have another question, an E mail question Why are the Western nations why have they not done enough for Chechnya like they did for Kosovo?<stop><start>Well, first of all, I don't think the situations are parallel. But I think the Western nations have spoken out against the excesses. We believe I think I speak for all the Western leaders I certainly will speak for myself that Russia had a right to take on the paramilitary forces who were practicing terrorist tactics, but that it was a mistake to adopt the position that, in effect, ruled out negotiations with the elected officials in Kosovo, who weren't part of the terrorism, and to adopt tactics that cause a lot of civilian losses without any kind of corresponding gain. So I think we've been pretty clear about that. That's different from what happened in Kosovo, where Milosevic basically ran the whole country out based on their ethnic origin and had no intention of letting them come back until he had crushed anybody's ability to say anything. So I don't think that the situations are parallel. But I think we have spoken out against the excesses in Chechnya and tried to get humanitarian aid in there and will continue to try to help the people of Chechnya and the legitimate political forces there. That's very different from what the paramilitary forces did. They have to bear their share of responsibility for what happened as well. I think some of them actually wanted the Chechnyan civilians attacked because they thought it would help improve their political views. Russia U.S. Relations<stop><start>Okay, we have a followup question from our chat room. Let me read it to you as it's coming in How can Americans know that America is really at peace with Russia?<stop><start>Because we're neither fighting with them nor on the edge of fighting. We've detargeted the nuclear weapons against each other. We are working to secure the nuclear weapons in Russia, to help them destroy nuclear weapons, to help safeguard the materials that remain. And I hope very much that after the next Russian election, we'll be able to make further progress on reducing the nuclear weapons there that we both hold.<stop><start>And Vladimir Putin, the Acting President, is he someone that you can deal with?<stop><start>Based on what I have seen so far, I think that the United States can do business with this man. I think he's obviously highly intelligent he's highly motivated he has strong views. We don't agree with him on everything, but what I have seen of him so far indicates to me that he's capable of being a very strong and effective and straightforward leader. Taxes and the Internet<stop><start>All right, let's go back to another issue involving the Internet. This is a question Mr. President, what role will you play in the debate on taxing Internet commerce?<stop><start>Well, we've played some role already. I signed a bill last year to have a 3year moratorium on any kind of discriminatory or transactional tax, if you will, on the commerce on the Internet. I don't think that there should be any access or any other kind of discriminatory taxes, from my point of view, ever on the Internet. The tough question is the whole question of what happens to sales that if they were not on the Internet would be subject to State and local sales tax. And the Governors are trying to work through that. I know Governor Leavitt has taken a particular interest in that, the Governor of Utah. I think that's something that we have to work through because we need there are whole questions about the need for States to simplify their tax structures, and there are other questions there that have to be resolved. And I think that's going to take some time to resolve. But I don't think we should have access taxes on the Internet or any other kind of discriminatory taxes, because this is an important part of our economy, and we want it to grow. I think that for the States and the localities, they're going to have to keep working until they work through what the operational problems are.<stop><start>Doesn't that discriminate, though, against stores a bookstore, for example<stop><start>Of course it does.<stop><start>that you have to pay tax<stop><start>Absolutely, it does.<stop><start>but if you go to Amazon.com you don't have to pay taxes?<stop><start>It does, and that's the argument that the Governors are making and the argument a lot of the merchants are making.<stop><start>Well, where's your position on that?<stop><start>Well, what I'm trying to do is get them together. There are also the Internet people point out that there are also a lot of complications in the way State taxes are. And they have on their side the weight of Supreme Court law which basically was made from mailorder sales. The same argument was made against mail order sales. And the prevailing legal position is that if you don't have enough connections to a State, you don't have the obligation to collect and remit the sales tax. Keep in mind, the sales taxes do it's just that the seller doesn't have to collect and remit it. So most of the people I know who have Internet businesses are concerned about trying to make sure they get a simplified system, and they know what the drill is. Their main concern, however, is not having access to the Internet itself taxed. And I'm with them on that. And I'm trying to support the process that now exists to resolve the issue of how State taxes, the sales taxes, can best be collected in the way that's not too burdensome on the Internet. You don't want to burden the Internet, but you don't want to put people who aren't making sales on it out of business. And we've got to find that right balance, and that's what we're working on. Austria<stop><start>We have another question from our chat room, an international question involving the political situation in Austria given the fact that Joerg Haider is now his party is part of the Austrian Government. Let me read to you the question What does the United States plan to do to make sure that Austria knows that Nazi sympathy will not be accepted?<stop><start>Well, I think we've made it quite clear that we do not support any expression of either sympathy with the Nazis in the past or ultranationalist race based politics, antiimmigrant politics in the future. That, I think, is equally important here. And we've also tried to stay pretty close to where the European Union has been because, after all, Austria is a part of Europe, and they've been very tough in condemning what the Austrians have done here. So I think we're on the right track. There is a delicate balance, however. You know, Austria is a democracy this man's party got a certain percentage of the vote. He did it based on appeals that went well beyond a narrow race based appeal. And we don't want to say or do anything that builds his support even further. But I think it ought to be clear to every Austrian citizen that we in the United States do not approve of his political program or his excessive rhetoric. Iran U.S. Relations<stop><start>Let's stay overseas. We have another E mail question about U.S. Iranian relations I'd like to know, Mr. President, your view on the recent developments of Iranian American relations as we, the Iranian youth, are really anxiously following political developments between the two countries and no doubt willing to finally see a healthy and mutually respectful relationship between the two.<stop><start>Well, that's what I want. You know, I said several weeks ago now, maybe a few months ago, that the United States had not been entirely blameless in the past in our relationships with Iran, and that we wanted a good relationship with Iran, that we did not support and did not condone anyone who would support terrorist actions, and that we had some difficulties with Iran, but we were viewing with interest affairs within Iran. We wanted the Iranian people to have a good democracy. We like to see these elections, and we want to be supportive of better relationships if we can work them out on ways that are mutually agreeable. I think that one of the best things we could do for the long term peace and health of the Middle East and, indeed, much of the rest of the world, is to have a constructive partnership with Iran. And I'm still hoping that that can materialize. A lot of that is now in the hands of the Iranian people and their elections and also the leaders of Iran. Some of them don't want that, but I think some of them may want that. And I think it's important that the genuine reformers there not be, in effect, weakened because of their willingness to at least talk to us, because I think the United States should always remain open to a constructive dialog to people of good will. And I think that the estrangement between these two countries is not a good thing. I think it would be better if we could have a relationship.<stop><start>As you know, Mr. President, in this regard, 13 Iranian Jews were accused of spying, and they're being held. Is this an irritant in this? What do you want the Iranian Government to do on that front?<stop><start>Well, I have been assured by the Israelis that they were not spies. And I've done quite a bit of work on it. I'm very, very concerned about this, because people cannot it is an irritant. The American Jewish community is very, very concerned about it, and we've done a lot of work on it. And I'm hopeful that justice will be done there and that no one will be punished for being a spy who isn't. That's not a good thing to do. And that, obviously, is a real it's one of the sticking points. But I think that there are other people of good will who the Iranians recognize are their friends, who want better relationships with them, who have also talked to them about this, and I'm hoping that it will be worked out in a satisfactory manner. Media Mergers<stop><start>Okay, Mr. President, I think we have another question from our chat room. Let's see what it is How can we keep the media giants from squashing the little guy? I guess they might be referring to the recent merger of our own CNN Time Warner AOL. What's your answer to that?<stop><start>Well, I think the main things to me are there are two sets of little guys, I guess. The one thing is you don't want to and Steve Case has talked about this for many years, himself<stop><start>He's the chairman of AOL.<stop><start>The chairman of AOL that it's important not to have access choked off. We want all these if these mergers go through, we want them to lead to greater access to greater options to consumers at more affordable prices. Then the second thing is, you want other competitors to be able to get into the game. That's what all the big controversy was over the antitrust suit involving Microsoft. And that's handled in the Justice Department, strictly apart from the White House, so we had no role in that one way or the other. And without expressing an opinion on that case one way or the other, I think what I favor is an American economy where people who have good ideas and new messages they want to get out ought to have some way to do that, if they can generate a following. So that's what needs to be monitored here. Some of this amalgamation I think is inevitable, given the possible synergy that could exist, for example, between a company like AOL and Time Warner, with all of its myriad publications and programs and networks. But you've got to have there has to be some room for people who want to compete, and then there has to be a guarantee that consumers will not be choked off and their prices hiked and, in fact, they will have more access to more programs at more affordable prices. And I think those are the touchstones that ought to guide Government policy. Small Business<stop><start>All right. Let's take another question from our chat room, CNN.com chat room What will the current and future administrations do to keep small business alive? Sort of related to the last question.<stop><start>One of the things that I'm very proud of about this economy and again, I don't take total credit for this this is part of our prosperity but in every year I've been President, we've set a new record for starting small businesses every single year. I think that the Small Business Administration has an important role to play. I think that we have dramatically increased the number of small business loans that we finance, and we've concentrated on women and minorities, others who have been traditionally denied credit. We have promoted aggressively for the first time what we call community development financial institutions, where we put Federal money into banks to try to help them make small loans to people who never could have gotten credit before. Just as we do around the world, we're now doing that here. And that's helping. We've tried to continue to minimize the burden of Government regulations on small business. And I think that's important to keep an entrepreneurial environment in America, so people can get access to venture capital if they've got an idea and start it. So I think having the right conditions and then having specific access to capital and technical support through the Small Business Administration and the community financial institutions that's the best thing we can do for small business. President's Legacy<stop><start>We have another question about the future in our chat room What will the history books say about the Clinton Presidency?<stop><start>Well, I'm not sure, because that's for the historians to decide. But I think they will say, among other things, that we had a we came into office with a different approach that was attuned better to the changes that were going on in the economy, in the society and in the world, and that we helped America get through this enormous period of change and transition in the metaphor I use, to build our bridge to the 21st century and that our country was stronger when we finished than it was when we began. I hope that's what they'll say, and I believe they will. President's Future Plans<stop><start>All right, we have a follow up question from our chat room. Let's take a look at that one Mr. President, what are you going to do when you leave office? Which is now less than a year away. You probably are you counting the days?<stop><start>No, not in a negative way. I mean, I'm not eager for them to be over. In fact, one of the problems I have is, I want to work even harder now to try to get as much done as I can. When I leave, I'm going to establish a library and a public policy center.<stop><start>That will be in Little Rock.<stop><start>And that will take a couple years to do. And I'm going to try to maintain a high level of activity in the areas that I'm particularly interested in. I've spent a lot of my life working on reconciliation of people across racial, religious, and other lines. I'm very interested in using the power of technology, like what we're doing now, to help poor countries and poor areas overcome what would ordinarily take years in economic development and education. I'm very interested in continuing my work to try to convince Americans and the rest of the world that we can beat global warming without shutting down the economy, that it's no longer necessary to use more greenhouse gases to grow economically. I'm very interested in promoting the concept of public service among young people and trying to get more young Americans to take some time off to serve in our National Government or the State and local government. Those are four things I'll do. Basically, I want to try to be a good citizen. America's given me a lot, and more than I could have ever dreamed. I've loved being President. And I feel that I've acquired a certain level of experience and knowledge, that I owe that to my country. And along the way, I hope to write a few books and have a little fun, too. And I hope I'll be a member of the Senate spouses club. I'm going to do my best to support my wife in every way I can. But I just want to be a good citizen. I want to try to put what I've learned in a lifetime to use in a way that benefits the people of America and others around the world who I care about.<stop><start>And you'll commute between Chappaqua, New York, and Little Rock, sort of?<stop><start>Yes, I'll spend some time in Little Rock for the next couple of years, you know, like I said, getting the facility up. And I'll spend some time with Hillary, as much as I possibly can, in New York. And then I'll probably travel some. And I hope we'll be able to travel some together. It depends on what happens in the next year. But I'm really looking forward to it. I love this job. I don't know if I'll ever do anything again that I love the work as much as I love this. John Kennedy described it well. He said, basically, it challenges all your abilities. It challenges your mind, your emotions, even your physical strength. But I think that I can do a lot of things that will help other people when I leave here, and I'm going to do my best to do that. President's Favorite Websites<stop><start>All right, Mr. President, if you'll take a look at our chat room, the people who are participating in the CNN.com chat, they're participating in huge numbers right now. Let's take another question, though, from an E mail person named Seth. He says this Mr. President, I have heard that you are an avid web surfer and on line shopper. What are your favorite websites?<stop><start>Well, I wouldn't say I am avid. I did do some Christmas shopping for the first time on line this year, though. And I even I bought some things from the Native American craftspeople up in South Dakota, at Pine Ridge, which was really interesting to me. But I love books, so I like Amazon.com. And I'm fascinated by eBay, because I like to swap and trade, and it reminds me of the old kind of farmer's markets and town markets I used to visit when I started out in politics in Arkansas so many years ago. I think the whole concept of people being able to get on line and sort of trade with each other, and almost barter, is utterly fascinating to me. Issues of the New Millennium<stop><start>All right, we have another question, Mr. President. We only have a little time left. Let's take this from the chat room Mr. President, what is the biggest issue facing Americans in the new millennium?<stop><start>Well, I think the most important thing that we have to do is to make up our minds that we are actually going to build a more united country out of our diversity and out of our groundbreaking technology and advances in science and technology. That is, I think that if you look around the world today, the biggest problems seem to be rooted in racial, ethnic, religious strife. If you look at America and how well we fit with a positive vision of the 21st century world and you look at the continuing problems we've had here, with these hate crimes, for example, the most important thing we could do is get our minds right and get our spirits right and realize that we have to learn to live with people who are different from us. We have to learn to keep our conflicts with them within proper bounds, so that our common goals override the differences between us. If we build one America, that's the most important thing. The American people are so innovative, so creative, and we're so well positioned for the future, everything else will work out. But if we allow ourselves to fall into these deep divisions over including political ones differences of opinion are healthy demonization is destructive and self indulgent. And that's basically what we've got to work on. If we can keep working together enough in creative tension, then everything else will work out. I'm confident of it. Social Security<stop><start>All right, Mr. President. We have time for one final question. It's from Wolf in Washington, DC that would be me, by prerogative, as the moderator of this discussion, this on line interview we're having You know the Republicans today in the House of Representatives are pushing legislation that would remove the limits, ease the limits on Social Security recipients as far as their earnings after they reach 65 until 70 a very sensitive subject, affects a lot of people watching right now, how much money they could earn and still be eligible for Social Security. Will you work with the Republicans, support them in eliminating those caps on earnings?<stop><start>Absolutely. I'm thrilled by this. I hope this is just the beginning of a signal from them that they're willing to work on this whole Social Security area. I think we should lift the earnings limit for two reasons. One is, I don't really think it's fair for people if you're 65 today in America, your life expectancy is 83. And you want to be alert you want to be physically strong. And we know as people stay more active, they're going to live better, not just longer. So I don't think we should penalize them. Secondly, I think as the baby boomers retire, it's going to be important to have a higher percentage of people over 65, if they want to, working. This will be good for our society. I'm strongly in favor of it. If they will send me a bill what we call in Washington speak, a clean bill that is, doesn't have a lot of other things unrelated to that littered to it I will be happy to sign it. Then the second thing I'd like to urge them to do is to think about my proposal to dedicate the interest savings that we get from paying down the debt because of the surplus in the Social Security tax to the Social Security Trust Fund to do two things Number one, put the life of the Trust Fund out to 2050 that will take care of most of the baby boom generation and number two, do something about a single woman's poverty on Social Security. Married women's poverty on Social Security, about 5 percent overall, seniors over 65, under 10 percent now. Single women on Social Security tend to live longer, tend to have less money their poverty rate is somewhere between 18 and 20 percent. So I like getting rid of the earnings limitation. It's the right thing to do. Let's just do it. But then let's lengthen the life of the Trust Fund and do something about the poverty rate among women who are retired.<stop><start>Mr. President, thank you so much for joining us from the Oval Office. Always, of course, great to be in the Oval Office. And one day when you're not in the Oval Office, you'll probably be excited coming back here as well.<stop><start>I will be. I'll always be excited to come here. And maybe I'll even get to do a web chat with you afterward. January 26, 2000 State of the Union<stop><start>Mr. President, welcome.<stop><start>Thank you.<stop><start>Can we assume, sir, that tomorrow night in the State of the Union, you're going to declare the state of the Union to be in pretty good shape?<stop><start>It's in good shape. And I'm very grateful. But I'm also going to challenge the Congress and the country to make it better.<stop><start>The things that are good about this country right now, how much of that do you believe you deserve credit for?<stop><start>Well, I think most of the credit, as always, goes to the American people. This is a country where citizenship is the most important job anybody can have, and I think we should start with that. I think the Members of Congress who have worked with us deserve a lot of credit. But if you look at where we are now, compared to where we were 7 years ago, I think the fact that we got rid of the deficit and are running surpluses the fact that we changed the philosophy of the National Government on welfare, on crime the fact that we have formed unprecedented partnerships with people in the private sector to deal with all kinds of social problems teen pregnancy, which is down, adoptions, which are up the fact that we have protected more land than any administrations in the country's history, except those of the two Roosevelts I think that those things are things that our Government did. I also believe that people have a lot more confidence now, that we can actually do things as a nation. In '92 we didn't just have economic distress and social decline. We had this political gridlock and discredited Government. The national Republicans had badmouthed the Government for 12 years, and they'd done a pretty good job of convincing America that it couldn't do anything. Now we have cut the size of Government by over 350,000. It's the smallest it's been since John Kennedy was here, and it really works to empower people and to create these partnerships. So I think that we have played a role in the recovery of the economy and in the improvement of the situation with crime, with welfare, with education. We've opened the doors of college to virtually all Americans. And I think all these things count for something. And of course, our country has been a great force for peace and freedom around the world. And I'm very grateful for the chance we've had to all of us to serve here. President's Historical Legacy<stop><start>Do you believe that history is going to give you credit for all those things you've just enumerated?<stop><start>Well, I think that's up to the historians. I think that history will be very much more that people who do serious histories of this administration will be amazed at the amount of energy and effort that went into the wide variety of areas that we worked in. And I think that it will show that in virtually every area we had progress, from helping to reduce poverty to improving the plight of our children, to creating an environment with the reform of telecommunications, the reform of banking, and getting rid of the deficit and major investments in science and technology, to this exploding new economy. I think it will show that we helped America to make this major transition into a new economy and an era of globalization.<stop><start>Are you worried about what the historians are going to write about you?<stop><start>No, I can't control that. But I think time will tend to accelerate the positive and put what negative there is into proper perspective. And I feel quite comfortable about that. But the main thing is, I don't think too much about it because I know that the only thing I can do to impact on it is to do the right thing today by the American people. I mean, my philosophy has been, ever since I got here, is that in the modern political world, the most important thing you can do is get up and go to work and concentrate on your job and always keep thinking about tomorrow. And all the pressures that operate on you are designed to prevent you from doing that, to hobble you, to distract you, to divide you, to get you to obsess about what somebody said or wrote or is doing. And so my whole theory has been from the beginning that if we could start and give first 4 years and then 8 years of unbridled, concentrated effort, no matter what else happened, the American people would be all right. And that's really all I hired on to do, is to try to help them do better.<stop><start>Let me read what the New York Times said in its lead editorial on Monday. They're talking about you, your legacy, and your Presidency as you go into this last year. It said, "historians are beginning to categorize Mr. Clinton as a politician of splendid natural talent and some significant accomplishments who, nonetheless, missed the greatness that once seemed within his grasp." What's your reaction to that "what might have been" kind of thing?<stop><start>I think that well, first of all, I think it's not productive to talk about what might have been. But I think if you the question is how you keep score, what is this time like, how will you measure it? The time that this is most like is the turn of the last century. Did we manage the transition of America in the new economy and an era of globalization well, or not? I think the answer is, we did. Did we make social progress? Did we actually change the way we approach social issues? If the issue is crime, welfare, national service, the answer is, we did. Were we good stewards of the environment? We were. And then, what were the forces you stood against, and what did you stop? And if you look at the forces we stood against from 1994 forward and what we stopped, I think the answer is, what we did was, A, successful, and B, good for America. And then, did we work with contending forces when we could to reach common agreement? I think the answer is, we did. So I believe that, first of all, there is no such thing as history, because this is still going on. We shouldn't worry about that. You know, in 5 years, 10 years, 20 years I got a book the other day on President Nixon's Presidency, and then I got one a week afterward on President Kennedy's Presidency that are still being written. I just read a new book, a great book, on Theodore Roosevelt's Presidency. And I think the further away you get from it, the more perspective you get and the more you're able to look at all the evidence. So all of us frankly, my view is not much better than the New York Times' on this. Neither one of us really can properly evaluate how this will be viewed in the light of history. I think that we have, given what we could have accomplished within the framework of possibility that was there and the job that was there before us, I think we've done pretty well. But all I can tell you is, I've worked every day, and I did the best I could, and I'm going to let the historians make their judgment after I give it one more hard year. President's Agenda for Last Year in Office<stop><start>All right, let's talk about the one more hard year. Is there one particular thing that you really want to do before you leave this office?<stop><start>Well, there are many things that I really want to do before I leave this office. Obviously, I'm still heavily engaged in the search for peace in the Middle East. But whether we can do that or not depends<stop><start>What's the problem there, Mr. President? Particularly Syria and Israel, what's the problem?<stop><start>I think the main problem is they haven't talked in a long time. There's still a fair measure of distrust. And the decisions which have to be made will require of both parties actions which will cause difficulty for them with some constituencies in their country. But let me say, I'm convinced that both the leaders of Syria and Israel want peace, and I'm convinced that substantively they're not that far apart. So we have a chance to do that. But you asked me what I wanted to do. That's something I would like to be involved in if they want to do it. I'm prepared to do whatever I can. I want to continue to do everything I can to protect the natural treasures of this country. I want to lay the foundation for America dealing with climate change. And I want to lay the foundation for America dealing with what I think will be the biggest security challenges of the 21st century. I believe you know, all the attention today is on whether we can develop a missile defense and, if so, whether we can deploy it without falling out with the Russians and our friends and other countries who question this. But the likeliest threat, in my view, is brought on by the intersection of technology and the likelihood that you'll have terrorists and narcotraffickers and organized criminals cooperating with each other, with smaller and smaller and more difficult to detect weapons of mass destruction and powerful traditional weapons. So we've tried to lay in a framework for dealing with cyberterrorism, bioterrorism, chemical terrorism. This is very important. Now, this is not in the headlines, but I think it's very, very important for the next 10 or 20 years. I think the enemies of the nation state in this interconnected world are likely to be the biggest security threat. And then, of course, you know the things that are really close to my heart I'm going to try to get a lot done in education, in health care, in bringing opportunity to poor people and reducing poverty in this country. Health Care<stop><start>What about health care? What is it that you would like your legacy to be on health care?<stop><start>Well, I wish I could have given health insurance to all Americans, because I still think it's inexcusable that we are the only advanced country in the world that doesn't do that. But I feel good about many of the things we have done, in medical research, in letting people keep their health insurance when they change jobs, in providing much more preventive screening for older people with illnesses or potential illnesses, and of course, in the Children's Health Insurance Program. So I'm going to focus now on what I think I can get done this year. I want to try to increase the number of people with health insurance dramatically by letting the parents of children in the Children's Health Insurance Program buy into it, by letting people between the ages of 55 and 65 buy into Medicare. And I want to have another big investment in biomedical research. Education<stop><start>Now, what about education? What mark can you leave in this next year on education?<stop><start>Well, let's first of all, if you look at what we have done we've already helped almost all the States to develop higher standards. And we've got test scores in reading, math, and college entrance exams are up.<stop><start>And you feel you've done that? You feel the administration has done that?<stop><start>No, I I think our administration has contributed to it. No, the people that did it were the kids and the parents and the teachers. But I think, consistent with our philosophy, which is to be a catalyst for new ideas and to be a partner to help people achieve it, there's no question we've had an impact. Now, one thing we've had a really direct impact on is we've done more than any administration ever has to open the doors of college to everyone we with big increases in Pell grants the direct student loan program, which lets people borrow money at less cost and pay it off at a percentage of their income. We've got a million work study grants. We've got AmeriCorps, 150,000 young people there. And the HOPE scholarship tax credit and the lifetime tax credit really means people have no excuse for not going to school. Now, I have also proposed this time, for the first time in history, that we make college tuition tax deductible, up to 10,000 a year, which will mean that we have guaranteed access to 4 years of college for all Americans. I think that is a huge achievement. Since I became President, the number of the percentage of high school graduates going to college has gone up to 67 percent. That's an increase of 10 percent. But we need for everybody to be able to go. And so I think that this will be a major achievement. Now let's go back to the beginning. The next big challenge, besides making this is the last piece, making college universally available. The next big challenge is to make sure that everybody's diploma means something. And we've been working on this all along, starting in early childhood, the increases we made in Head Start. We now have 1,000 colleges sending mentors into grade schools to make sure kids learn to read by the third grade. And I think we've increased the emphasis on that you probably noticed that Jim Barksdale gave 100 million to the University of Mississippi, to do nothing but focus on how we can teach grade school kids to read. This is a huge deal it's great. So what else do we need to do? I think we need a national strategy to turn around failing schools or shut them down. I think we need to institutionalize reform with more charter schools. And I think we ought to make preschool available to everybody. And everybody that needs it ought to have access to after school. I think if you get those things done, and we continue to train the teachers, especially in how to use the computers as you hook up all the schools to the Internet, I think you're going to see really big, continuing improvements in education.<stop><start>But you can't do all that this next year, can you?<stop><start>Sure we can. We can no, but we can take big steps toward it. If you look at the whole history of our country I read something President Johnson said the other day, and he got through Medicare and the Medicaid and the first steps of major Federal aid to education. He talked about how most of our big progress comes in deliberate, discrete steps. And if you take enough steps in the right direction, you turn back around, you see you've come quite a long way. So what I'm going to try to do in my speech tomorrow night is to outline what I think the long term goals for the Nation in the 21st century should be and then what steps I think we can realistically hope to achieve in this year and urge the Congress to join me in it. Bipartisanship on the Legislative Agenda<stop><start>Now, you're doing this, of course, in a Presidential election year. In whose interest is it to help you do this, in terms of simple politics of getting it done, to help you improve your legacy or get things done before you leave office?<stop><start>Well, first of all, it's in none of their interest to help me improve my legacy. That's not why they should do it. It is in their interest to do the job they were hired to do, which is to help the people they represent. And I think the people that they represent, whether Republicans or Democrats, would find it amazing that someone could suggest they ought to take a year off. I mean, anybody who wants to take a year off ought to give up their paycheck and say, "I'm sorry. I'm not going to work this year, but I'm not going to take your money." Secondly, in a more mundane way, it is clearly in the interests of all the people in Congress to do things that are good for America, because the American people will appreciate it. I think it helps the Democrats, but I don't think it hurts the Republicans I mean, a bunch of them have to run next time, too. And people are going to know want to know, what did you do last year? If you look, it's quite interesting. We had a very good year in '96, where I had to veto the welfare reform bill twice because the Republicans wouldn't agree with me to guarantee child care and health care and more nutrition and medical care and transportation for the welfare families. And then they did it at the end, and we got this big welfare reform. And now we've got 7 million fewer people on welfare. In '98 we passed a lot of very important legislation at the end, because it was election year. So what you might see in terms of Congress now is not an enormous amount of activity at the beginning, although I do believe there's a good chance we can fairly early pass my proposal to help Colombia fight off narcotrafficking and preserve its democracy and work with its neighbors along the border. And I think there's a good chance they'll pass the China trade normal trade relations bill I hope that's true. But I think at the end of the year, when people will be held accountable by the voters, I think there's a chance we'll get quite a lot done. We did in '96. We did in '98. I think we will this year. 2000 Elections<stop><start>Mr. President, what do you make of Governor Bush's comment the other night after he had won the caucuses in Iowa? He said, this is the beginning of the end of the Clinton era, and everybody in the room cheered.<stop><start>Well, they would. Laughter I think if he were I think if he said that he would reverse what we were doing, I think he would. And I think that's the choice before the American people. I mean, he's offered a 1.4 billion tax cut. And the only thing I'd ask the American people is to remember, you know, we've now had 20 years of experience. We tried it their way for 12 years, and they quadrupled the national debt. And when I took office, we had high unemployment, a massive deficit, a huge debt, and totally neglected our domestic affairs. We had rising crime, rising welfare rolls, all the social indicators going the wrong way. Now, we've tried it our way for 7 years. We've got the biggest surpluses in history, the first back to back surpluses in 42 years. We can get this country out of debt now in 13 years out of debt for the first time since Andy Jackson was President in 1835. And all the social indicators are going in the right direction. So it seems to me that he was being honest with the people, that he said that he will reverse this course. And I do think the American people ought to vote for change in this election, because things are changing so fast around us in this globalized world, we have to keep changing. The issue is Are we going to build on what works or revert to what didn't? And that's what I think the issue is. Assessment of the Administration<stop><start>You've given kind of your definition of the Clinton era, and he has his. Now, what he is the interpretation of what he's talking about is that it's just a continuation of what all the Presidential candidates have mentioned to some degree, that Republicans like Governor Bush, more than the Democrats, but even Vice President Gore and Senator Bradley have said about returning the Presidency back to a nobler office, to words like promising to restore dignity and respectability, decency and trust to the Presidency. They're talking about you, aren't they, Mr. President?<stop><start>Well, first of all, I made one mistake. I apologized for it. I paid a high price for it, and I've done my best to atone for it by being a good President. But I believe we also endured what history will clearly record was a bogus investigation, where there was nothing to Whitewater and nothing to these other charges, and they were propagated, and tens of millions of dollars were spent, and we got a clean bill of health on that. And in terms of trust, let me just tell you a story. I went back to New Hampshire for the seventh anniversary of the New Hampshire primary in 1991 or the eighth anniversary, excuse me, last year in 1992 so it was the seventh anniversary. I went back there last year. And it was raining, and there were children standing in the rain and people standing in the rain. And the thing that meant the most to me not the Democratic Party event, just going around, because they heard the campaign in the most detail was people saying, you know, "We're so much better off now, but the thing that really matters is, you did exactly what you said you would do." And it seems to me that all of us in life, we can spend all of our time pointing our finger at other people and saying we're better than they are, or we can work as hard as we can on our own character, on our own lives. And if we're in public life, we need to tell people what we're going to do and then we need to do it. And if we don't do it, it ought to be because we tried and couldn't. I think that's what people know about me and this administration. We laid out the most detailed set of commitments anybody ever had in '92. We've accomplished virtually everything we set out to do. What we haven't accomplished, we tried and failed to accomplish. And even there, in the health care area, we made a lot of progress. And people know that. So I'm satisfied that the American people will make a judgment in this election based on what's best for them and their families, on whatever factors they choose. They're in control again. We're back into the biggest job interview in the whole world. And whatever they decide and however they decide it, I think they'll get it right. They nearly always do.<stop><start>Do you get angry, though, when somebody like Alan Keyes said recently, "We are coming to the end of the most disgraceful, the most immoral Presidency in the history of this country"?<stop><start>No, because he's a far rightwinger who probably thought Iran contra was a good thing for America. And you know, there's just no evidence to support it. I mean, you know so it doesn't make me mad at all. How could you take that seriously? This is about one of the things that I had to learn when I moved to Washington is, before I ever got angry at anybody anything anybody said, was to ask myself whether it was about the subject they were discussing or whether it was really about power. And I remember once, I had a conversation with a Republican Senator in the middle of the D'Amato hearings when he was trying to convince people, or at least the Republican Senators were, that my wife had done something wrong in this Whitewater thing, which was totally absurd. And so I asked this Senator, I said, "Do you think either one of us did anything wrong? Not illegal, just wrong, even wrong?" And he started laughing. He said, "You've got to be kidding." He said, "Of course you didn't do anything wrong. That's not the purpose of this. The purpose of this is to convince the American people you did. It's all about power." Now, I made a mistake. I acknowledged it. I've done my best to atone for it. But all this broad brush stuff, you know, people see that for what it is. And when I'm criticized now, I try to remember Benjamin Franklin's admonition that our critics are our friends, for they show us our faults. So, you know, I'm just trying to be a better person and a better President every day. I don't know what else to do. And I'm trying not to let this stuff get in the way. Again let me say, the job of a President is to have a vision and a strategy and pursue it to show up every day and, insofar as possible, to think about the American people and their welfare, and to not think about himself. The environment in which a President operates is designed to prevent him from doing that as much as possible, to make him torn up and upset, full of recriminations and anger, and have his attention divided. So what I've tried to do is to create a frame of mind and a climate around here with our people, so we could do our job. I hope I've succeeded. I think the results speak for themselves. Impeachment and Independent Counsel's Investigation<stop><start>Difficult question on a matter of history that I feel compelled to ask you, Mr. President. We sat, you and I, 2 years ago almost to the day, and I it was the day that the Monica Lewinsky story broke in the Washington Post and the Los Angeles Times. And I and you denied that you had had an improper sexual relationship with Ms. Lewinsky. In retrospect, if you had answered that differently right at the beginning, not only just my question but all those questions at the beginning, do you think there would have been a different result and that, in fact, you might not have even been impeached?<stop><start>I don't know. I don't know. I just don't know. I wish I knew the answer to that, but I don't. But the thing I regret most, except for doing the wrong thing, is misleading the American people about it. I do not regret the fact that I fought the Independent Counsel. And what they did was, in that case and generally, was completely overboard. And now rational retrospectives are beginning to come out, where people have no connection to me, talking about what an abuse of power it was and what a threat to the American system it was. And I'm glad that our people stuck with me, and that the American people stuck with me, and I was able to resist what it was they attempted to do. But I do regret the fact that I wasn't straight with the American people about it. It was something I was ashamed of and pained about, and I regret that.<stop><start>There was another interview that we did before that, in which I asked you if you agreed with Susan McDougal that Kenneth Starr was out to get you. And your answer was interpreted by Mr. Starr and others that, "well, the facts speak for themselves," is what you said. There have been many facts since then. That interview was even before 2 years ago. Do you think the facts have spoken on that?<stop><start>Oh, absolutely. I mean, it's not even close anymore. Everybody knows what the deal was. And more and more, there will be people who didn't have a vested interest in trying to promote some view they had previously taken who will evaluate this and come to the same conclusion. And as I said, even though I'm sorry about what I did and sorry about the developments there, I really felt, once the last chapter of this played out, that I was defending the Constitution and the Presidency. And I feel that more strongly today. I think they knew for a long time there was nothing to Whitewater. They knew it was a bunch of bull. They had no evidence. In fact, if even the law we had, or the one we had before the independent counsel law had been in place, there never would have been a special counsel because it didn't meet the standard. The only reason I agreed to ask Janet Reno to appoint one in the first place was I really believed that the people that were talking about it wanted to know the truth, and I knew that they'd just look into Whitewater and find out it was a big bunch of bull and go on. And what I found out was that a lot of the people who wanted it didn't want to know the truth. And they wanted somebody that could hang on until they could find something that they could find about me or Hillary. But they knew for a long time. You know, they knew before 1996 that there was nothing to it, which is why they had to get rid of Mr. Fiske and get Mr. Starr in there, so it would drag past the '96 election. And I think history will show that, too. So I'm relaxed about that, and I don't spend much time thinking about it. Again, to me, I had to make amends to the American people, and to my family and to my friends and my administration. I've done my best to do that. Now, the only way I can do that is just keep looking toward the future, to stay excited, to stay upbeat, and to stay focused. And that's what I'm trying to do.<stop><start>Do you have moments, private moments, of pleasure and satisfaction knowing that if, in fact, there was a conspiracy to run you out of office, it didn't work, you're still sitting in the Oval Office?<stop><start>I don't spend much time thinking about it like that. You know, maybe when I'm gone I will. I'm grateful that for whatever reason, my friends and my family stayed with me the American people stayed with me. I believe I defended the Constitution against a serious threat. I'm sorry I did something wrong, which gave them an excuse to really go overboard. I'm very sorry about that. But mostly what I try to do is to focus on trying to be a better President, trying to be a better person, trying to be a better husband and father, just trying to do the things that I can do. You know, you can't none of us ever gets ahead in life, I don't think, by taking big satisfaction in victories or looking down on other people or keeping our anger pent up. One of the things I learned in this whole deal is you've got to let all that go. Life will always humble you if you give in to your anger or take some satisfaction that you defeated somebody or some satisfaction that, well, no matter how bad I am, at least I didn't do this, that, or the other thing. Life will always humble you. And I have just tried to be grateful and to keep serving and to just worry about myself and not think about other people I mean in terms of whether you're doing right or wrong. That's all I can do. But I'm actually what I feel every day is just, I'm just happy. My family was all here at Christmas. We had this fabulous Christmas. My administration, I've been fortunate by having all these people stay with me. The ones that leave are going off to do exciting things. And we've got I feel that when I took office, the country had so many problems in it. It's like we've turned it around now, and we're going in the right direction. And now we've got a chance to really dream big dreams for our children. And that's a great thing to be doing in your last year in office it's great and not only to dream those dreams but actually take some big steps toward achieving them. So I'm just happy. I just you know, I can't be mad or it's hard for me to think about all that stuff. It just happened. I've come to terms with it, and I'm just trying to go on. President's Future Plans<stop><start>When this next year is over, you'll leave office, and you'll be the youngest former President since Teddy Roosevelt. You'll be in your fifties. You'll still have a lot of time and energy. Are you worried about that at all, about staying connected?<stop><start>No, I'm excited about it. No, no, I'm so excited about it. I have I mean, I'm worried I'll have to go back to learning basic things. You know, I'll but I'm excited about that, too, driving a car, shopping for food, paying the bills when the house the pipes freeze, you know, all that kind of stuff. You've got to go back to living your life like an ordinary person. I think that's good. But Theodore Roosevelt had an interesting life when he left office. And I of course, I've said this many times I think President Carter has basically set the standard for what Presidents should do in terms of his public service at home and around the world. And that shows you that there's just worlds of possibilities out there. I'm very excited about it. There are all kinds of things that I'll have to do. Of course, I'll have to make a living, and I hope I'll have to make a living to support a wife who's continuing our family's tradition of public service. But Hillary Clinton's Senate Campaign<stop><start>Do you think she's going to win?<stop><start>I do, yes. I do.<stop><start>Why? Why do you think so?<stop><start>Well, I think they're both very strong, formidable people and strong, formidable candidates. You know, you get all these elections, where you've got to bad mouth one candidate to like another, and you'd think I'd certainly be there in the race involving my wife. But the truth is, the mayor and Hillary are both strong, formidable people. They have impressive achievements in their lives that relate to public service. But I think that she's much better suited for the work of a Senator and this whole legislative process. And I think that the passions of her life, 30 years of work and achievement in education and health care and the challenges that children and families face, and the whole philosophy she has about community are more consistent with where New York is today and what they need in the future. And so that's why I think she'll win, not because I think he's the bad guy or something, because I think they're both very strong people. But I think that New York will believe that, in the end, that what she represents and where she wants to go and what her skills are and what she knows and cares most about is a little closer to where they are than what he his whole approach. And I think she'll win. So I'll have to worry about that. But once I figure out how to support my wife's public service she's supported mine for many years and fulfill my other family obligations, I want to find a way, through the center I'm going to build in Arkansas, with my library, and in other ways, to be a public servant. You don't have to be an elected official to be a public servant. You can be a servant in other ways. And I can help others and do things, and that's what I want to do.<stop><start>Mr. President, thank you very much.<stop><start>Thank you. January 18, 2000 Elian Gonzalez<stop><start>Mr. President, I know your time is valuable. Let me start my recorder here. The first thing I wanted to ask you, there have only been a couple of times in this century that Congress has come together, got their heads together enough, both sides of the Congress, to come together and pass legislation to give somebody citizenship. It happened with Winston Churchill, a few other people. I wanted to know if Congress does it looks like the first thing they're going to do when they come back into town is work on the Elian Gonzalez case. If they did pass a private bill in both Houses and they feel like politically they've got enough backing to do that, what would you do with that bill if it got to your desk?<stop><start>I don't know. I haven't thought about it. I think it would be this is not Winston Churchill, for one thing. You know, I don't think that Congress should put its unless they know more about the facts than I do, I don't think they should put themselves in the position of making a decision that runs contrary to what the people who have had to do all the investigation have done. I think that, obviously, if they believe the INS made a mistake, their decision is subject to challenge in Federal court. And the Congress even Members of Congress can petition to be heard there. But I think that we're setting a I think that it would irrevocably lead people to the conclusion that this was much more about politics than it was whether that little boy ought to be taken away from his father. They're basically taking a position that if you live in Cuba, if we can take you away from your father, you're better off your parents. And I think that's the INS reached a different decision, having exhaustively looked at what was best for that child. As you all know, I have no sympathy for the Castro regime. I signed the present bill. I think it is tragic how they have blown every conceivable opportunity to get closer to the United States. Just as we were making progress, they murdered those pilots. So I'm not sympathetic there. But I think that we need to think long and hard whether we're going to take the position that any person who comes to our shores who is a minor, any minor child who loses his or her parents should never be sent home to another parent, even if that parent is capable of doing a very good job, if we don't like the Government of the country where the people lived. And again, I say I am not I have no brief for the Castro government or for many of their policies. I think the way he has attempted to politicize this is also terrible. It's not just the Cuban Americans that have attempted to politicize it. He has responded by attempting to politicize it. So this poor little boy is 6 years old. He has scars from his mother's death of which he can only be dimly aware. And making a judgment about what is in his best interest and what is most likely to give him a stable, healthy, whole childhood and allow him to grow into an adult as a solid person, I'm sure, may not be free of difficulty. And I just think that the decision ought to be made, insofar as possible, independent of countervailing political pressures. State of the Union Address<stop><start>Mr. President, the State of the Union is right around the corner, so I guess is the State of the Union part of the interview. In the previews that you all have made available of what's coming up, it seems like most of it is beefing up programs that you already have, like today's announcement, and returning to<stop><start>It's quite a beef up. This is the biggest thing ever done yes<stop><start>Quite a beef up which is or trying to get back to unfinished business. And I was wondering whether you were planning on trying to go for some new breakthrough issue this year, or whether that's not really possible in a last year.<stop><start>Oh, I think that when you see everything we recommend in the aggregate, you might think that in terms of specifics, it's the most ambitious set of proposals since my first year. Last year was a very ambitious speech, but in terms of what I asked the Congress to do, it required some willingness on their part to meet with me and work through a joint position on Social Security, for example, or joint position on Medicare. I still think we may get a joint position on Medicare, and we may get part way there on Social Security. I'm still going to try to persuade them to take all the interest savings that we get from not spending the Social Security surplus and putting that in the Trust Fund that will take Social Security out to 2050, beyond the life of the baby boom generation. So I'm still not sure we won't make that, but if you just look at the specific policy proposals I will make, not just in the unfinished business area but in the new area and the unfinished business is important. I mean, you've got the Patients' Bill of Rights, closing the gun show loophole, and banning the import of large ammunition clips. You've got the minimum wage. You've got the hate crimes legislation, the "Employment Non Discrimination Act," the prescription drug for Medicare. So we've got a huge even though we got a great deal done at the very end of the last Congress, there's a big unfinished business list. And then, as you know, I've been rolling out a lot of these new proposals. And actually, there will be a couple of things that will be quite new that I'm not prepared to release yet. But I will have a couple of new proposals. But I think that the most important thing to me is to keep the country moving in this direction and aggressively embracing change, the right kind of change. That, I think, is critical to keep the recovery going, to keep bringing more people into the process of prosperity, and to keep bringing the country together. I think that's very important. So a lot of what I will recommend that is new is certainly consistent with what I've been doing for 7 years. I came to office with a very clear idea of where I thought America was off base, what I thought we ought to do, what kind of governing strategy I would have. And I believe that it's working. And I think people some people will say, "Well, he does things in increments." But if you walk down the road 7 years and you look back I mean, if I told you 7 years ago, after 12 years of quadrupling the national debt, I'll give you in year 6 and 7 the first back to back balanced budget surpluses in 42 years, from a 300 billion debt, you'd say that's not an incremental change that's a big change. But you do those things in small steps. If you look at the millions of people we've cut the welfare rolls about in half it happened in incremental steps. But it's a huge thing in the aggregate. And all the economic changes we've got the lowest African American, Hispanic unemployment rate ever recorded, the lowest female unemployment rate in 40 years, lowest poverty rate in 20 years, lowest single parent household poverty rate in 46 years. So you take it in steps, but if you keep walking in the same direction, all of a sudden your steps constitute a giant leap forward. Federal Budget<stop><start>In that larger mosaic, how do you of your record and your legacy in what you've done incrementally down the road, how important will it be if, 15 years from now, we haven't made significant advances on the debt? I mean, already your budget soon will break the '97 Balanced Budget Act. And certainly the surpluses are far greater than was predicted at that time. But how will history judge this generation of leadership if significant<stop><start>I think we should pay the debt off. And I think we should do it in 15 years. And the proposals that I will make are consistent with that, based on our latest numbers. Now, I have two things to say about the '97 budget caps. They were very severe, and they were thoroughly shredded by the Republican majority last year by turning everything into an emergency. I mean, the census was an emergency Head Start was an emergency continuing defense expenditures were emergencies. So the caps are not disappearing this year the caps were shredded last year. So the real question is the question I asked our people to look at, and we spent lots of time on it the end of last year is whether we could present to the Congress a budget that was not full of gimmicks, that reflected what the Congress spent last year, inflation in areas where with had that for example, in the defense area where we know they intended and still could we do that based on what we now believe the figures are and what our costs are in health care programs and other things and still get this country out of debt in 15 years and still not spend the Social Security surplus. And the answer, we believe, is yes, that you can avoid spending the Social Security surplus, continue to get the country out of debt in 15 years, and have a spending program for the next 5 years that reflects the decisions made by the Congress in the last year, without all those gimmicks. And you could still have a modest tax cut, nothing anywhere near the high end of what people had talked about in the campaign and what the Congress tried to do last year, but you could still have a modest one. So I think this is an honest budget that is fiscally responsible and still gets us out of debt. And I believe that we ought to embrace these big challenges, and I think that our children will judge us very well if we do and somewhat harshly if we don't. Because in my lifetime you've heard me say this over and over again, but I'm not young any more. I'm 53 years old. In my lifetime we've never had this combination of economic prosperity, social progress, national self confidence, with the absence of internal crisis or external threat. Not that we have no problems at home or no threats abroad, but none of it is sufficient to derail us from trying to imagine the future and then go after it. And it seems the one that one of the elements of that future ought to be a commitment to take America out of debt. Another element of the future ought to be a commitment from going to what I said today trying to make our country the safest big country in the world. Another element of that future ought to be trying to prove that we can grow the economy and dramatically reduce the global warming by maximizing technology. We ought to be able to prove that we can equalize the economic opportunity, that we can without holding anybody back, that we ought to be able to bring economic opportunity to these poor people in poor places that haven't had it. And I think in all those areas, in the education area, in the health care area, I think we will be judged by whether we made the most of what is truly a magic moment. The last time we had this sustained rate of economic growth with low inflation was in the early sixties, about 40 years ago. And if you look at the indicators now, compared to then in the aggregate, I think you would say our economy is stronger today, but there were a couple of years there where unemployment averaged under 4 percent and without much inflation. And it all came apart, first trying to come to grips with the civil rights crisis at home and then trying to pay for the war on poverty and the war for equal opportunity and civil rights and the war in Vietnam abroad. So that, basically, we had a moment there that we lost, not only because we became divided as a people politically but because our system simply could not accommodate building the America of our dreams.<stop><start>So what do you see as a threat to that? I mean, if the Vietnam period and all of that was a threat, what's the threat to that now?<stop><start>I don't think there is one. That's why I think we have no excuse not to really this should be a truly historic moment in America. I can't think of any time in our history when we've had this sort of opportunity. You might argue that it was similar, that the times which produced Theodore Roosevelt's administration, and then Woodrow Wilson's, were similar, where we were an emerging global power, we were basically at peace, where the world was becoming more integrated. You go back and read McKinley's speeches around the turn of the century he was the first President of the last century he said a lot of this. It's quite interesting. And so you might argue that that was a time like this. But I think that and I think it is a time in our history that most closely parallels this. If you go back to the early 19th century, you can find historical parallels in the exploration of Lewis and Clark and the acquisition of the Louisiana Territory. But the world was so different then, it's hard to do. So I just don't think we ever have had a time like this. It's not to say we have no foreign crises or security threats. We do. But they can all be managed. And the cost of managing them now is not inconsistent with what our obligations are in science and technology, in education, in economic opportunity, across the range of other areas. Agenda on Race<stop><start>Mr. President, you spoke a while ago about how you wanted to keep pushing for change. And I was thinking what's happened to minorities under your administration, that they have seen a pretty drastic improvement in their standard of living because of the strong economy. But one could also say that attitudes toward race maybe haven't changed that much. And I was wondering whether there was something that you thought you could still do about attitudes towards race in your last year.<stop><start>Well, I think they have first of all, I dispute the premise. I think they have changed. I think that we continue to see evidence that it's still a real problem. I mean, the unfortunate comments that the Atlanta baseball player made, that's really troubling. On the other hand, the fact that Hank Aaron and Andy Young met with him is encouraging. I mean, you know, 30 years ago that wouldn't have happened. I think last night I watched I was working on the State of the Union last night, and I had basketball on, on TV, muted. And I was watching the Minnesota Timberwolves play the Indiana Pacers. And they beat them on a buzzer beater shot. And then they interviewed Kevin Garnett, who is a very young man. I think he's the highest paid player in basketball, but he's very young, didn't finish college. And they asked him what Dr. King meant to him, and how his life had changed, and you could just see of course, 30 years ago no young African American would be making that kind of money and would have the kind of slant he had. So I think things are changing. But I think what I have to do I think there are three things generally I should be doing. Number one, I think we have to continue to try to close the differential in education and economic advancement. For example, the African American high school graduation rate right now is about equal to the white, non Hispanic high school rate, which is quite extraordinary. But the college going rate is different. And the Hispanic dropout rate is still quite a bit higher, largely because of the immigrants, first immigrants. So I think that this economic empowerment agenda I have, and the education agenda, the Hispanic education initiative, all those things, closing those gaps, that's important. Number two, I think we need to continue to have a vigorous enforcement of the law and highlighting those things we do not agree with. And number three, I think we have to continue the activities of the President's Office on One America. I think we need to continue to appoint more people from different backgrounds. We need to continue to have more meetings. We need to continue to highlight the problems. And I need to continue to speak out and work on this in America. I said three, but I like to say the fourth thing is I think that when our country continues its mission to try to end racial and ethnic and tribal and religious conflicts around the world, I think that has a reverberating effect here at home. I can give you just one very concrete example. Chelsea and I went to Kosovo together, and we went to the military camp. And you have this highly racial and ethnically diverse American military, very conscious of what they were doing in Kosovo and trying to end ethnic cleansing, and also very aware that insofar as they work together and live together and create a genuine community where everybody was treated equally, the power of their example could have as big an impact on the people of Kosovo as the force of their arms. So I don't think this this is the sort of work that may never be done, since in all of human history we haven't succeeded in rooting out people's fear or suspicion of those who are different. And there always will be those radicals which seek to advance themselves by demonizing groups of others. But I think we're doing better there. I think we're doing and I think there is a lot more we can do. Cyberspace Warfare and Cyberterrorism<stop><start>The Chinese Army's daily newspaper has signaled its willingness to aggressively use the Internet as a venue for warfare, to attack our military websites and our military attack us through on line methods. You in your critical infrastructure report recently sort of achieved parity with that and with your ROTC Corps idea and that sort of thing. But I'm wondering what precedents that sets. Even what we did in the conflict with Serbia, the precedents that that sets is sort of like fighting each other, attacking each other's satellites. Are you concerned about the precedent that using on line warfare in any form will have for future generations, since we are the most vulnerable set on the planet from E commerce to a lot of our Government installations?<stop><start>Because we're more open, you mean?<stop><start>Yes sir, because we're more open.<stop><start>And more Internet<stop><start>So we bring down in a hypothetical conflict, we bring down the PLA's air defense system, and they just take out our 911 systems and all that turn out all the lights at every 7 Eleven in the country.<stop><start>Well, I think, first of all, it is unrealistic to think that such systems would not be the targets of our adversaries. I think they're far more likely to be the targets of terrorists, organized criminals, narcotraffickers, than other countries. I believe that the answer is that we have got to be as strong as we possibly can be in the whole area of cyberspace safety. We've got to be as resistant to cyberterrorism and assault as we possibly can. And interestingly enough, this is something we get to practice on every day a lot, because every day there are always people trying to break into our computers, break into the Defense Department computers, break into various security computers. And so we get to work at it every day. And we've given a lot of thought to how you protect power systems, how you protect telephone systems, how you protect financial records. And so all I can say is that the question you asked confirms what I said at the National Academy of Sciences, I guess over a year ago. I think that's when I spoke there. We have got to be prepared to deal with the explosion of technology in ways that could threaten our security, not only on data systems themselves. Another thing you're going to see everything involving technology is getting smaller, the miniaturization of everybody. Everybody's got their little notepads now.<stop><start>I just got the Palm Pilot.<stop><start>He's way ahead.<stop><start>You ought to see old Kris's Palm Pilot. It's got everything from his great grandfather's birthplace I just saw the newest AT T and Nokia telephone that fits right inside the palm of the hand. Now, that same miniaturization process is bound to go on with weapons. So you're not only going to have the attempt that you mentioned to invade, to invade telecommunication systems and computer systems, but you're also going to have a miniaturization system that will affect chemical and biological weapons and other sophisticated traditional weapons, which will make them harder to detect, easier to use, easier to comport. You may have composite materials that don't show up on airport scanners. All these things are going to happen. That's why we're going to make cars out of different materials, make weapons out of different materials. And in the whole history of combat among nation states and before that, feudal groups or tribal groups, the normal thing that happens is a weapons system will be developed, and it will enjoy a period of success, and then a defense will be developed to it, and then there will be equilibrium until a new weapons system is developed that will give some dominance, and then you'll have some equilibrium. What we're trying to do with this massive investment we're making against bioterrorism, chemical terrorism, nuclear terrorism, cyberterrorism, is to collapse the timespan between offense and defense. One of the things, for example, that we really hope that will come out of the human genome is that we'll be able to develop software programs that will immediately adjust the antidote for certain viruses. If there's a biological warfare attack and you've got a mad scientist somewhere who changes the I'm just making this up but who changes the anthrax virus, for example, in some way it's never before been changed, and so then this person and then they spread it over 400 people in some town, and they begin to come around what we're attempting to do with the human genome project, what I think one of the corollary benefits will be is that you'll have software packages developed so that you will be able to immediately analyze that, and someone will tell you exactly how you would have to modify the antidote to anthrax to meet the new strain that is resistant to all known antidotes. So this whole struggle, as things change faster and faster and faster and you have the miniaturization of weapons systems to parallel with the miniaturization of other communication systems, will be to keep closing the gap between offense and defense until there is close to no difference as possible. That is the struggle for security in the 21st century. And I have tried to put America on that path. Without frightening the American people, without raising alarm bells, I've tried to make sure that when I left office we would have in place a properly funded, properly staffed system to prepare for the security threats of the 21st century. All the press goes to the highdollar hardware systems should we have a strategic defense initiative, a missile defense.<stop><start>Mr. President, we're running out of time here, so do you mind if we move on to some other topic?<stop><start>This is a big issue. All I'm saying is I'm not missile defense is important if we can do it. And missile threat is important. But you should know that I consider both the cyberthreats and the miniaturization of these other threats very significant. But I do believe when I leave office we'll have for my successor and for our country a system that will enable us to deal with it. President's Spiritual Growth<stop><start>Since you are talking to the Christian Science Monitor, we are interested in your spiritual journey, which you've mentioned a couple times. And you've talked about how amazed you've been by the power of forgiveness, especially in the last 18 months. And I was wondering if you could share with us what your own spiritual growth has been. Have you found any Bible passages particularly dear? Have you found any concepts that you've held onto that have helped promote your own spiritual growth? Could you just describe what's been happening with your own growth in the last 18 months?<stop><start>Well, this is a subject I think people in public life should address with some amount of humility and reluctance, not because people shouldn't be willing to affirm their faith but because we should remember the story that Christ told, in effect, bragging about the people that prayed in their closets instead of on the street corner. So I say that with all but having said that, I think the thing that has struck me is that in this journey I have made to try to that really has been a lifetime journey for me, and it's certainly something that's deepened since I've been President and something that I had to really focus on the last 2 years I think the thing that I have really had to work on is trying to gain some spiritual anchor that will enable me to give up resentments and disappointment and anger and to understand that in seeking forgiveness I had to learn to forgive. It's easy to ask for forgiveness. A lot of people think it's hard, but I think it's when you plainly need it, it's easy enough to ask for. But we're taught over and over again that we can't get it unless we give it. And I think what is you know, there's the wonderful Scripture where people are admonished to forgive those not just in the same measure that they're forgiven but 70 times 7. I think that what I have gained more than anything else is a certain humility in recognizing how important forgiveness is, but how it doesn't count and it can't count unless you can give it as well as ask for it. And that basically I used to see life as a struggle for always learning more things, cramming more things in my head, anywhere I could do more things, you know. Now I see the search for wisdom and strength is also a process of letting go. A lot of things you have to let go of. And I've been helped a lot by a lot of these ministers that have met with me and the Scriptures they've given me to read by a lot of Christians and even sects of Christians have written me around the country with tracts on forgiveness, how you merit it in what you do and how you have to give it in turn and also a number of people with whom I have worked as President. I learned a lot I've had on more than one occasion the opportunity to talk to Mr. Mandela about how he came to forgive those who were his oppressors, you know, and how he felt about it and how he what kind of forgiveness he ever sought for himself. I've really tried to deal with this in a very serious way, and I think I've learned quite a lot about myself in the process. And it's an ongoing effort. But I have to remember every day that human nature is so prone to find self respect in some element of one's character that you think is superior to someone else, and a lot of this is a matter of letting go. You just have to learn to let that go, just get up every day, try to do the best you can, be the best person you can be, and continue that individual journey of growth. And I work on it hard. And it's been a very humbling experience, but I think very much worthwhile for me, personally. Chelsea Clinton<stop><start>Mr. Lockhart is giving me the one morequestion signal, so I thought what I might do is use an old Wolf Blitzer trick which is<stop><start>Which is what ask three questions?<stop><start>Ask a question with the second question. Laughter Well, briefly, you mentioned Chelsea just a moment ago. And as you know, the White House can be a pretty tough place on first kids. But the thing you always hear everybody talk about is the poise and the grace that she has now as a young woman. I'm wondering basically what you attribute that to, and how you feel the press has been on her if they've kind of been giving her a fair shake as the kind of parameters were laid out from the very beginning? And secondly, not at all related to that, is you were heavily criticized for the FALN commutations, and there's a lot of irony in that, in that you're the least pardoning President in the modern history. You've issued fewer pardons that any President in the modern era. I'm wondering why you haven't availed yourself of that Presidential power more, since aside from the FALN thing, there's typically very little fallout for that, using that power.<stop><start>Well, let me say first, I think let me answer the first question first. Say exactly what you asked me about Chelsea again.<stop><start>The thing you hear everybody talking<stop><start>Oh, how the press treated her.<stop><start>How the press treated her, but how she, under the hothouse environment that the White House can be, with all the looking in<stop><start>I feel, first of all, very grateful that even though I don't agree with everything first of all, I think it's impossible to generalize about "the press," and it will become harder and harder to refer to something called "the press." Where is the press in the publications in the merger of America Online and Time Warner, right? So I'm always reluctant I sort of knew what that was, I thought, when I got elected. I'm not sure I know what that is anymore. But I think that, by and large, all elements of the press, with some very few exceptions, have been willing to let my daughter have her life and try to grow up and deal with all the challenges that entails and the extra burdens of her parents being in public life and all the controversies and ups and downs we've exhibited, without trying to shine the glare on her. And I am profoundly grateful for that, because I think every young person needs the chance to find his or her own way to maturity. And it's very difficult when your parents are as publicly exposed and prominent in daily life as her parents are. And it's made more difficult if you are prematurely turned into a public figure. I think to some extent she is one anyway, whether she's in the press or not. But I think basically the press has been sensitive to that. And I am profoundly grateful for that. And I hope that the life that her parents have lived in public life has been has offered more good than bad for her, as a child growing up. And she's a young woman now, and I hope that, on balance, it's been a positive thing. We love her very much, and we hope that it's and believe that, on balance, it's been good. Now Presidential Pardons<stop><start>On the related question of the pardons laughter .<stop><start>Let me say about Press Secretary Joe Lockhart. She's going to get a pardon. Laughter<stop><start>I want to say something here that nobody has ever given me a chance to say in public before. This is important to me. And I've been working on this hard. I did not know until ironically, until the controversy over the FALN thing that I had, apparently, both commuted fewer sentences and issued fewer pardons than my predecessors. I did not know that, but you should know what my generic attitude is. Generically, I believe a President should rarely commute sentences and should have good reasons for doing so if he does, knowing that that will always be somewhat controversial that is, if you attenuate a jury or a judge's sentence. That's what I did in the FALN case. I did it after Chuck Ruff, my lawyer, did an extensive survey. I thought it might be controversial. I regret it became as controversial as it was. I still think, based on the facts of those cases, I did the right thing. I still believe strongly that I did the right thing. And I can tell you categorically there was no politics in it, that Chuck Ruff handled this, and everything he says about it is true. I think everyone knows him as being an extremely truthful person. He handled it entirely, and only he handled it. And then he dealt with me on it. Now should we do some more commutations? Perhaps we should. But I think I would probably always be on the low side of that. On the other hand, I tend to have a much more generous attitude on pardons, particularly because under the Federal system I think people ought to get their voting rights back I don't think they ought to be discriminated about in getting jobs or keeping jobs or getting contracts if they have discharged their sentence and they've been out in law abiding society. Now, over time, before I ever got there, there developed a whole apparatus in the Justice Department which is its own independent bureaucracy for evaluating these things. And the tradition is that the President doesn't rule on them, one way or the other, until you get all these recommendations sent to you. And I think what I believe is that although this operation has a life of its own, I've asked I've tried to review it now because my instinct is that we should be granting more pardons. I don't mean we should just be cavalier. I mean if you still think somebody might be involved in something wrong not so much to wipe away the past as to free people up to live in the present and future. There are all kinds of suppose when you're 18 you commit some offense which gets you a 5 year sentence. And suppose and let's suppose under the sentencing guidelines then applicable, you served 2 years of the sentence. Well, my view is if you served the 2 years, then you get out, and you've got 3 years on parole. So the 5 years is discharged. Then you have to serve then you live a couple more years, and you have a totally exemplary life. I don't think that your past mistake should unduly cramp your present and future life. If you do something really terrible, you're going to be in prison for a long time. But I mean, people are just getting out all the time 90 percent of the people who go to jail get out. When they get out, we do not have a vested interest in seeing them continue to be punished. Our interest as citizens, after they pay their debt to society, is to see them be successful. I mean, when somebody pays, then when they get out, surely we don't want them to keep on paying. If they have to keep on paying, that's why you end up with more crime and a less successful, less healthy society. So my instinct is that again, I speak for myself each President will be different on this is that the President should be pretty reluctant to shorten sentences but should be willing to do so in appropriate cases but that the President should be more forthcoming in being willing to grant pardons when it's not really for the purpose of pretending that it didn't happen but of liberating people to make the most of their todays and tomorrows, because every single American has a big stake in people who actually do get punished later going on and living their lives in a straight and effective way. So that's my take on this. And we're looking to see whether there are any kind of changes we can make to be more effective in that regard.<stop><start>Thanks.<stop><start>I'm glad you asked me. You're the only person who ever asked me that. December 22, 1999 Terrorism During Millennium Celebrations<stop><start>Mr. President, because of the recent arrest and heightened security concerns at airports, do you expect, worry that there will be an incident of terrorism before the first of the year?<stop><start>Well, we are on a heightened state of alert, and we're doing a lot of work on this. But I would say to the American people, they should go on about their business and celebrate the holidays as they would, but they should be aware. You know, this whole millennial idea draws out a lot of people who are maybe, by our standards, deranged, and other people maybe want to use it for their own political ends. So if people see anything suspicious, they should report it to the authorities as quickly as possible. But otherwise, I should say, they should go on about their business. We're working very, very hard on this.<stop><start>It worries you?<stop><start>No, I'm concerned, but I think we have, I think, the best law enforcement folks we could have, and they are working very hard. And we're doing quite well so far. So I have every hope that we'll get through it. But I think that what I would ask the American people to do is not to stay at home and hide but just to keep their eyes open. If they see something that looks fishy, tell the authorities and we'll get on it. But they should know that we're working this very hard. Last Year of President's Term<stop><start>All right, let me I look around this office, and I see a desk over there that President Kennedy sat at. And I remember the story he said about the Presidency, and one of the great things about the Presidency was he could walk to work. As you think about leaving this building, what will you miss the most?<stop><start>I think what I'll miss the most is the work, the job, the contact with all kinds of people and all kinds of issues, the ability to make a difference, to solve problems, to open up opportunities for other people. There's almost no not almost, I suppose there is no job like it in the world. It's been an unbelievable thrill and a profound honor, and I will miss it very much. I'll miss a lot of the other things. I love living in the White House. Hillary, I suppose, has done more work on the White House than anybody since the Truman administration, redoing rooms and building a sculpture garden and doing things like that. And we love living here. I love going to Camp David I love Air Force One I love all of the perks of the job. But the thing I love most is being President, doing the job every day. It just to me, it's an almost indescribable honor. I would never grow tired of it, and I feel graced every day. Term Limits<stop><start>If you could change the 22d amendment, would you?<stop><start>I don't know. It's probably not fair to ask. On balance, I think the two term tradition has served us well. I'm glad President Roosevelt served the third term, because of the war. But on balance, I think it's served us well. Now, you know, I'm young, and I'm strong, and I'm, as far I know, in good health. I love the job. And so if I could serve again, I probably would. But I think that's the reason we have this limit, so that people like me don't get to make that decision. Laughter<stop><start>Are you going to leave a note in that desk over there for your successor, and what will you say?<stop><start>I will, and I don't know what I'll say. But probably most of what I'll say will be predictable. I'll be wishing my successor well and talking a little bit about the job and offering to be available if I can ever be of any help. National Economy<stop><start>Prosperity. Economic prosperity and growth has been a hallmark of this Presidency. How long can it last, and will it be a part of our future, our near future?<stop><start>Well, it certainly will be part of our future. Now, how long it will last? The truth is no one knows. I believed when I got here that there was a chance that we could have a very long period of economic growth. Now I couldn't have known, when we started and we started slashing the deficit and investing more in technology, that we would have the longest economic expansion in history that would even outstrip wartime when we had been fully mobilized. And in February we will. But I think that there are some fundamentally different things now. If the Government can follow good policies and the Federal Reserve will follow smart policies, there is this enormous power of productivity we're getting out of the revolution in technology and information technology. It's just now working its way into every sector of the economy, and it's also continually advancing itself. So I think if we can keep that going and if we can keep our markets open, that's very important, not just the exports we sell but the imports we buy, the open market keeps the American economy highly competitive and tends to keep inflation down. And I think that's one of the things that's been under appreciated about this. I never will forget, back in '94 I got really alarmed when lumber prices went way up in a hurry, and I thought homebuilding prices were going to explode. And then all of a sudden, we had this big infusion of less costly imports. Now, we have to work on fair trade rules we've got to have we can't be taken advantage of, as some tried to during the Asian financial crisis, but on balance, these open markets are very good for us. They give us growth and competition, keeps inflation down. And I think that's very good. Globalization and the Technology Gap<stop><start>What we want to do here in this conversation is really focus on the future. You've done a number of conversations about this century and your term in office. Thinking about the future and the economic health of the country, there is also this process. In 10 years 10 years ago the wall came down 5 years ago the web went up. Globalization is part of our life.<stop><start>It is.<stop><start>Some worry and Seattle might be an indication that we're looking at the possibility of a great gap between a two tier system, between the haves and the have nots of the world, those who get it with technology and those that don't.<stop><start>Well, first of all, the worry is well founded, but it's a constant. That is, we have had a great gap in opportunity, even though it's sometimes closed and sometimes open, but there has been a huge gap between the haves and have nots since the dawn of the industrial revolution and the creation of middle class societies with mass wealth. Some have had it, and others have not ever created it. There is a chance that what will happen now is that it will become more pronounced across countries and within countries because of the advantages that technology literate people and entrepreneurs with access to money will have in a rapidly changing world. That is, it's liable to accelerate. But I would remind you that in the United States we had an increasing gap between the rich and the poor for about 20 years, as we moved into this new economic phase. The same thing happened when we changed from being an agricultural economy to an industrial economy. In the last 2 or 3 years, we started to see the gap close again. And the answer is not to run away from globalization. The answer is to make change our friend. The answer is to have broad access to information and information technology, to have broad based systems of education and health care and family supports in every country, and to continue to try to shape the global economy. You mentioned Seattle. I think that you had a lot of people out there protesting globalization, but they can't reverse it, and it's done a lot more good than bad. It's created over the last 50 years, as the world has become more interconnected, we've moved away from the specter of war as holocaust, even though there have been a lot of smaller wars, and we've seen millions, hundreds of millions of people lifted into the middle class. So the answer is how to make this globalization more human, more humane, and how to shape it so that everybody has a chance to be a part of it. Response to American Hegemony<stop><start>Do you hear around the world now, as I'm sure you've heard from heads of state and others, this kind of unilateralist America in the future is too strong, too dominant, and the fear of a backlash against us.<stop><start>I agree with that. And I think I've tried to be very sensitive to that I think we have and to make sure that we fulfilled our responsibilities. I think that, on the one hand, people are glad that we won the cold war, if you will they're glad that the forces of freedom won. All over the world people are embracing democracy and market economics. But if you enjoy the level of military and economic strength we have and the level of political influence, people are going to resent you. And I must say and again, I don't mean to be partisan here, but I think the resentment is deeper when the Congress takes as long as they did to pay our U.N. dues and puts the conditions on it they did, when we don't ratify the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, when we basically preach to other people around the world, you ought to do this, that, or the other thing. But instead of helping them, we continue to have a very large military budget, but we spend the smallest percentage of our income on assistance to other countries to help them succeed economically and politically of any advanced country in the world. So we do some things that breed this resentment. Now, a lot of them resented me at Seattle because they think that when the United States says we ought to have core labor standards and we ought to have good environmental standards in a world trading system, that I'm trying to keep poor countries down, that I just want them to open their markets to us, but they won't get rich because I'm going to try to force them to give up their comparative wage advantage or their ability to grow. That's not true. So some of the resentments against America are not fair. But it's all perfectly understandable. I mean, look how fortunate we are compared to most other countries. and when people get in a tight spot, they want us to come help Bosnia, Kosovo, the Middle East, you name it. Prospects for the 21st Century<stop><start>Do you think this century coming up will be America's century, as the 20th century has been described?<stop><start>Well, I think it can be. But I think we have to think very carefully about how we want to define that. I mean, look what we know will happen. We know that, barring some completely unforeseen event, China and, sometime thereafter, India will have economies that look bigger than ours, because they've got so many more people than we do, 4 times as many people in the case of China, even more. We know that Europe will grow more integrated, I think, in the 21st century. And the European Union will be more and more a union. And they have 50 percent more people than we do, and they could have a lot more than that if they continue to bring in other countries. So I do not believe that we will have the relative economic dominance we have today. We've got about 4 percent of the world's people and almost 22 percent of the world's income. But I think we can be still very prosperous. I think we can still be the strongest individual country in the world in many ways. But I think we will have to build partnerships with some of those who resent us now. We will have to have an increasingly interdependent world. Because, whether we like it or not it's like globalization interdependence is another word for globalization we will become more interdependent, and we'll have to learn to be adroit at that. We won't be able to just say, "Well, if we like it, we're here, and if we don't, we'll walk away." We'll have to really work on our partnership skills. Future Allies<stop><start>You touched on something that I've thought about. This century was marked by our friends becoming our enemies France and Germany our enemies becoming our friends. Is that going to be part of the 21st century, people we now look on as rivals become friends, friends become<stop><start>I think it is highly likely that some of the people that have been our most recent rivals will be our friends.<stop><start>Like?<stop><start>Well, I know a lot of people are very skeptical about Russia now, because of the problems they've had. But they just had a genuinely democratic election with a lot of debate, vigorous opposition, brutal campaign ads, you know, the whole 9 yards.<stop><start>Did the results surprise you?<stop><start>No. It's about what I thought they'd be. You know, still only 25 percent of them are voting for the old Communist Party the rest of them are for something else, in spite of the economic hardship that they have faced in the last few years. So I still think there's a chance that if the leaders of Russia define their national greatness in 21st century terms, that is in terms of their ability to unleash the creative capacity of their people rather than their ability to dominate their neighbors, which was their 19th and 20th century definition of greatness, that they will be we'll have a real partnership there. It's also possible that we'll have one with China.<stop><start>A partnership?<stop><start>Absolutely. It just depends on how they view us and their own self interest. Future Rivals<stop><start>Do you see, on the other hand, people who we might consider friends, like Western Europe, becoming more rivals because<stop><start>I think the only way that would happen is if it were provoked by greater protectionism, economic protectionism outside the borders of Europe. That is Europe could get so big, and they could integrate the economy of Europe, and they'll have a lot of poor countries coming in just like we have poor States and poor regions. If they close their economy, rather than open it, that could be a difficult thing. But I think it's far more likely that our former enemies will become at least friendlier, if we're not friends, and that all of us together will face the enemies of the nation state in the 21st century.<stop><start>The enemies of the nation state?<stop><start>Yes. The organized enemies of the nation state that have vast money and vast access to weapons and technology and travel the organized crime syndicates the narcotraffickers the terrorists. And I think the likelihood that all these people will be integrated there may be some rogue states that will support them, but I think you're more likely to see the nation states trying to uphold stability in their national lives, increasingly open and democratic. Even China, I think, will become more open and more democratic. They're already electing mayors in a million little towns, literally.<stop><start>In democratic elections?<stop><start>Yes. And so I think by their standards. They don't have a Republican or a Democratic Party like we do, but they are having these elections. I think in the future the likelihood is that nation states will be allied against the enemies of the organized society and the open society. Chemical and Biological Threats<stop><start>Do you expect in the next 10, 20 years to be a terrorist attack in the United States, thinking about the recent events, thinking about the potential for germ warfare, the potential for biological attacks, and the potential<stop><start>Oh, absolutely. I think that's a threat.<stop><start>A likelihood?<stop><start>Well, I think it's highly likely that someone will try. And keep in mind, the World Trade Center was blown up just a few years ago. We were fortunate to catch the people who did it. Oklahoma City had the terrible explosion. What I think will happen let me back up a minute. I have done everything I could as President to try to organize the permanent Government, the people who will be here when I am gone, and the Congress to deal with the long term threat of biological, chemical, and small scale nuclear war, as well as the increasing sophistication of traditional weapons. And we are doing a massive amount of work now in preparation to try to minimize the chances that it will occur and God forbid if it should occur to try to minimize the impact of it. I think, parenthetically, one of the benefits of our research into the human genome is that we'll be able to analyze these viruses much more quickly and come up with antidotes much more quickly than we used to be able to. Even now, when new strains of diseases whether it's AIDS or anything else come up, we can identify them so much more quickly than we used to be able to. So what I think will happen let me just make this point the organized forces of destruction will take maximum advantage of new technologies and new scientific developments just like democratic societies do. So I think, just like the computers are all being miniaturized and people carry these little pads around that have and now you've got these gadgets where you can use as a telephone or a typewriter, do E mail, and all that. Well, the same miniaturization will apply to biological and chemical weapons. And if people should get nuclear materials that can be made into a bomb, to nuclear materials, which is why we've worked so hard with Russia to control access to that stuff. So we've just got to be ready. There will always be bad guys out there in the world who will try to take advantage of people's vulnerabilities.<stop><start>But aren't the odds against us, when you describe that kind of technological advantage I mean, and just recently two people trying in separate cases trying to get inside America's borders with explosives it gets more and more easier to conceal, and more and more the likelihood that an American city<stop><start>Well, if you go back through all of human history and you look at conflicts in weapons systems and that's what we're talking about, biological, chemical weapons offense always precedes defense that is you've got to know what you're defending against. So my goal in this whole thing, trying to mobilize the country on biological, chemical weapons, and make sure the Government is doing everything possible, is to close the gap between offense and defense. And the answer to your question is we won't be severely there might be incidences. I mean, the World Trade Center was blown up Oklahoma City was blown up. We've got a guy in the laboratory in the Middle West, almost 5 years ago, who was trying to develop biological agents, political extremist.<stop><start>And there are scary ideas coming out of science, where viruses can attack certain ethnic groups?<stop><start>Yes, there are people that<stop><start>The potential of science to do harm is alarming.<stop><start>But you know, it's always been that way. I mean, it's always been that way. And I think that I'm actually more optimistic than keep in mind, no one believes that someone's going to come in and kill everybody in America. That's what we worried about during the cold war. And we still have to deal with these traditional threats. That's why India and Pakistan is perhaps the Kashmiri issue is perhaps the most dangerous one in the world today because you've got two nuclear powers there who are somewhat uncertain about one another and why we have to work hard to avoid that. But yes, there will be problems. Yes, there could be terrible incidences. But I would say to the American people, they should, on balance, be hopeful. But what they should do is to support the leadership of this country in putting maximum resources into research and development so that we're prepared. And I think we will grow increasingly sophisticated in picking these people up, increasingly sophisticated in detecting these weapons, and what we can't afford is to have a long period of time where these offensive capabilities of the new age are better than the defensive capabilities. If we can close the gap between offense and defense, we'll be fine.<stop><start>What's interesting about a conversation about the future with you is that because of this office and your curiosity, you see and know more than almost anyone. I mean, you are aware because you talk to the scientists you talk to people responsible.<stop><start>I think about it a lot.<stop><start>You do?<stop><start>Sure. I have to. See, I think one of the jobs of the President, because of the unique opportunity of the office you just described it, is to always be thinking about what will happen 10, 20, 30 years from now, and to allocate some time and effort to make decisions for which there will be almost no notice. You know, right now, I mean, hardly anybody reports on or thinks about the work we're doing in biological warfare or chemical warfare the speech I gave at the National Science Foundation but it's fine. It's what my former national security aide, Tony Lake, used to call "the dog that doesn't bark." And there is a sense in which there's a bunch of dogs in this old world you don't want to bark.<stop><start>It's the old notion about if the tree falls in the forest and nobody hears it, did the tree fall? Can you are there things that we don't know about that alarm you, this sense of science and where it's at and what's coming down the pike, that gives you great pause?<stop><start>Well, there are a lot of things that concern me. You know, we've done a lot of work the other thing that, besides the chemical and biological weapons trying to protect computer systems. Year 2000 Problems<stop><start>Speak to Y2K. Where are your concerns, and do you think that most of those<stop><start>My concerns, well, they're much more traditional in Y2K. I think we've done a good job here. We've spent a lot of money I say we, the American people, not just the Government, the private sector we've spent a lot of money, tried to be ready. I feel a high level of confidence. It wouldn't bother me a bit to get on a commercial airline, for example, on New Year's Eve or New Year's Day and fly around. I think our systems are in order here. My concerns really are for some of our friends around the world that have more rudimentary computer networks and capacities and whether they will have a shutdown that they won't be able to immediately fix or get around.<stop><start>And make them vulnerable to what?<stop><start>Well, if there were problems in the financial system, what if records disappeared and people lost money? That would be destabilizing in some countries. If power systems<stop><start>And make them vulnerable to outside forces, to kinds of elements you mentioned earlier?<stop><start>Well, maybe, but I think more internal destabilization. What if a power system shuts down in a big country with a hard winter? How long will it take to get back up before anyone would freeze to death? I mean, these are the kinds of practical problems that I'm concerned about. But I think that I'm talking about something far more insidious, though. What we have to this is, again, offense and defense. What we have to do this technology of computers is changing so fast, and we've got a lot of whizbangs out there, and they can make a ton of money working for bad guys. So what we've got to do is to continuously work on protecting the cyber security, the infrastructure of the information economy, just like we're trying to deal with chemical and biological warfare and the miniaturization of weapons and all this. But most people are good people. We've got plenty of talented people. We just need to be imagining the future, thinking about all the problems as well as all the opportunities, and then prepare. Society always has problems there are always misfortunes. But basically, I believe the future is quite promising and far more exciting than any period in history. I wish I were going to live to be 150 I'd love to see what happens. Possibilities of the Future<stop><start>Would you like to be cloned?<stop><start>No. I wouldn't wish that on anybody. Laughter<stop><start>There is this thing, too. I mean, think about Chelsea's children, your grandchildren, say the year 2050, whatever the appropriate time might be. What's this world going to look like? Is it going to be more interesting, more challenging? How will we travel what kind of food will we eat will we go to other planets?<stop><start>I think we'll be eating food that's like what we eat now. I think it will be safer. I think we'll know a lot more about it, even safer than it is now. I think that in big, urban areas, I think we'll still have our love affairs with cars. I think they will be much more safe. They'll be made of composite materials that are much more resistant to wrecks. And I think where there is a lot of heavy traffic, I think that we'll all travel by a computerized plan. I also think there will be a lot more rapid rail transit. I think it will be safer. It'll be better, and I think we'll be able to do things while we travel and spend more time. I think we will go into outer space, and at sometime in the next century, I think there will be large, permanent platforms sustaining life in outer space that will basically be jumping off places to distant planets and maybe even beyond. That's what I think will happen.<stop><start>Hold on one second. I know you've got to change tape. Okay.<stop><start>You said computerized plan<stop><start>No, I meant cars. You want me to say it again?<stop><start>How much time do we have?<stop><start>I just misspoke myself.<stop><start>How much time do we have here?<stop><start>I don't know, 10 minutes, 5 minutes? You want to do that again?<stop><start>The last question? All right. Okay. Think about the future of your grandchildren, Chelsea's children, the year 2050. What will life be like then? What kind of food what kind of transportation will we be living on other planets? Will we still be concerned about things that concern us now, like overweight, stuff like that?<stop><start>I don't think all of the problems will go away. I think the food will be pretty much like it is now, but even safer. I think that on Earth, we'll travel in automobiles, still, but in traffic jams, we'll have automated systems. I think there will be a lot more high speed rail. I think we'll travel in ways that give us more free time to do things while we travel. I think that there will be large platforms in outer space that will be jumping off places to distant planets, and I think that the biomedical advances will be stunning. I think a lot of cancers will be cured. I think there will be a vaccine for AIDS. I think that the research in the human gene and the revolution, the continuing revolution in microchips will enable people to probably cure spinal cord injuries by having a programmed chip that goes into the spine and replicates all the nerves that were damaged. I think that it'll be a fascinating time. And I think there will be lots and lots of continuous daily communication with people across national and cultural lines.<stop><start>Would you go to space if you had the opportunity?<stop><start>I might. I'm real interested in it. I like it a lot. I think it's important. Post Presidential Plans<stop><start>What one thing do you most want to accomplish I've got to go when you leave this office? What's the single most important thing for you to accomplish when you leave?<stop><start>You mean, after I'm not President anymore?<stop><start>After you're not President.<stop><start>I think the most important thing is for me to be a useful citizen of this country and of this world, because I've had opportunities here only my other living predecessors have had. And I think that for me to be able to continue the work I've done in racial and religious and ethnic reconciliation and trying to convince people that we can grow the global economy and still preserve the environment and trying to empower the poor and the dispossessed, in trying to spread the universal impact of education and use technology to benefit ordinary people, these kinds of things I think I should continue to do this work and trying I want to get young people into public service. I want them to believe this is noble and important work. So I think, in a word, I have to be a good citizen now. That's the most important thing I can do when I leave office is to use the maximum to the maximum extent I can, the knowledge that I have, the experience that I've gained to be a really good citizen.<stop><start>Thank you, Mr. President.<stop><start>Thank you. December 22, 1999 Cabinet Room<stop><start>Good evening. We're in the Cabinet Room at the White House in this Christmas season. It's a great pleasure to have as our special guest, as part of our millennium month, the President of the United States, Bill Clinton. Do you spend a lot of time do you have a lot of Cabinet meetings?<stop><start>I do. And I have a lot of other meetings in here, like with individual Cabinet members. I met this week with three or four different Cabinet members and extended staff here. So we have large meetings in here.<stop><start>This room is, like, right off the Oval Office?<stop><start>That's right, right off the Oval Office.<stop><start>Did they plan it that way so the President could run right in and meet with how often do you have Cabinet meetings?<stop><start>I don't have too many full Cabinet meetings, because we have 23 members of the Cabinet plus Chief of Staff. So I have a few of those a year, when we have to do a review and get all geared into one issue or another. But I have a lot of meetings with various Cabinet officials in this room and with maybe more than one who are all working on a common project. Year 2000 Problems<stop><start>We have a lot to talk about, and I want to get an overview as we look ahead to this millennium but cover some current things. I guess the thing everybody is talking about is, should we be frightened? That's the basis of the State Department yesterday should we travel should we stay home? We're told the Cabinet members have been asked to stay home or stay in Washington. Is that true?<stop><start>The Cabinet members are staying here, but it's really just as a precaution, because we feel a high level of confidence about where we are with the Y2K problems. We've been working on this for years. We've spent a lot of money on it we've tried to get all the private sector involved. All the big systems in this country, I think airline travel, banking systems, electrical systems, Social Security checks all those things I think are in good shape. We're here partly as a precaution and partly so, if any of our friends in other parts of the world have any trouble, we can all be there to give whatever help we can. Year 2000 Terrorism<stop><start>And how about the terrorism threat, where people are asked to be careful, especially overseas, and we have these arrests occurring in Washington and Vermont?<stop><start>Well, what I would say to the American people about that is that we know that at the millennium, a lot of people who may even be a little crazy by our standards or may have a political point to make, may try to take advantage of it. So we are on a heightened state of alert. We're working very hard on it. No one can guarantee that nothing will happen. But all I can say is we're working very hard. And my advice to the American people would be to go on about their business and do what they would intend to do at the holiday season but to be a little more aware of people and places where they find themselves. And if you see something suspicious, well, call us and let us know. Call the authorities. We're working very, very hard on this. And if it were me, I would not just refrain from activities. I'm going to go out and do my Christmas shopping. I'm going to do what I normally do.<stop><start>Are you saying if you have a hunch about something, go to the hunch?<stop><start>If you have a hunch about something, if you see something that's suspicious, you should report it, just to make sure that we do everything we possibly can to maximize our protection. But I wouldn't just hunker down until it was all over.<stop><start>Colin Powell says that maybe by doing all this, you've scared them off. You know, if you make people fear the alert so much, that might cause terrorists to have a second thought.<stop><start>Well, they should have a second thought, because we're working it hard.<stop><start>In cooperation with other nations?<stop><start>Absolutely. Vice President Al Gore's Offer To Debate<stop><start>All right. Let's discuss some things political one of your main you know that. Do you agree with Al Gore's request to have debates? "Forget all the advertising. Let's debate."<stop><start>Well, I think it's an interesting idea. I don't want to get into handicapping the campaign. I think that the more debates they have, the better. I'm very proud to be a member of my party when I see those two debate. They're smart. They have their ideas. You know I favor the Vice President and not just because I feel personally loyal to him. I think he's been by light years the best Vice President this country has ever had, by a long, long way. But I think the fact that he and Bill Bradley are out there talking about education they're talking about health care they're talking about biomedical research and they know what they're talking about and they've thought about these things I think it's a very substantive, good thing. And that's what I think elections ought to be about, so I'm proud of that.<stop><start>Were you surprised at the idea, though, to say, let's forget you know, Goldwater and Kennedy were going to do that.<stop><start>I was surprised. And I must say I find it quite interesting. I was intrigued by it. If someone had offered me that in 1992, I probably would have done it.<stop><start>Would have taken it?<stop><start>Yes, probably, because I think we need to find out whether we can have elections without the kind of money that they cost today, and we can't have them without that kind of money unless people can have access, the candidates can have access to the voters. That is, what costs all the money is access to the voters.<stop><start>Barry Goldwater had told me that he and John Kennedy had arranged that if Goldwater would be the nominee in '64, had Kennedy lived, they were going to travel around together.<stop><start>I think it would have been wonderful. I still think it would be great. And I'd like to see it happen in a general election. I don't think it's necessary for the voters to be for one person but think that the other person is a bad person. And I think it's very bad development in our politics. I think it's one reason that the voting percentage goes down people think, ugh. So if there could be a way to be more and more debates, not only now but in the general election, I think it would be a good thing for American democracy. I did three last time and three the time before, but I would have done six or seven or however many. I believe in this. Candidate Bill Bradley<stop><start>You say, of course, you're supporting your Vice President. What do you think of Bill Bradley, though?<stop><start>Oh, I've known him for many years. I like him. He's a very smart man. He's had a very interesting life, and he's got an interesting take on things.<stop><start>Do you ever think they might run together?<stop><start>They'd be a good ticket. Laughter It would be a good ticket. Challenges of a Vice Presidential Campaign<stop><start>Kennedy could run with Johnson. You picked a man from a neighboring State to run with you. Do you understand the difficulty of a Vice President running?<stop><start>Yes.<stop><start>That's not easy, is it?<stop><start>No. But it gets easier as time goes on and people focus on it. And it's easier now than it was 100 years ago, I think. But I think that, as I said, when Harry Truman became President, he didn't even know about the atomic bomb.<stop><start>Did not.<stop><start>And we had already lost five or six Presidents in office by the time he became President. Since then, there has been an increasing level of seriousness given to the job. Lyndon Johnson was a major figure, and Richard Nixon was a major figure. Both of them had responsibility in office. Then President Carter upped the ante more Vice President Mondale had far more responsibility than anybody had before. President Reagan, to his credit, gave President Bush a lot of responsibility. But no Vice President has ever had the range of responsibility and the level of achievement, accordingly, that Al Gore has had, whether it was in our technology policy, our environmental policy, our foreign policy, the economic empowerment of poor areas. I could just go on and on.<stop><start>So there is nothing he isn't abreast of?<stop><start>No.<stop><start>If something happened to you, there's not surprise we have to tell him?<stop><start>No. There would be nothing if something were to happen to me tonight, he could become President, and there would be nothing he wouldn't know, no person he hadn't met, no issue he hadn't dealt with.<stop><start>We'll be right back with the President of the United States, Bill Clinton, at this Christmas season. Don't go away. At this point, CNN took a commercial break. Trade Debate and the Seattle Round<stop><start>Speaking of debates, it was Vice President Gore's idea, we just reminded each other, to debate Perot. And I understand you were the only one here that agreed with that.<stop><start>In the beginning.<stop><start>There was a lot of disagreement.<stop><start>They all thought there was a lot of downside to it. But I wish we had more debates in recent years on trade policy, because it's such a controversial thing. Everybody is for selling more of our exports. Everybody has the feeling, because we have a big trade deficit, that people take advantage of us. People are worried about losing their jobs, even though the unemployment rate is at a 30 year low. And I think we need to continue to debate this. I wish we had more of them. I hope there will be some trade debates in this election.<stop><start>Did Seattle throw you, Mr. President? I ask that because Governor Bush was with us last week, and he agrees completely with you on the trade issue, but he said he thought I'm paraphrasing that you kind of copped out, that you didn't forcefully attack those people who were demonstrating you sort of rode the middle.<stop><start>Well, first of all, I attacked those who were violent in no uncertain terms. And I said to those who were demonstrating for a cleaner environment or for decent labor standards that I thought their concerns were legitimate but their opposition to the trade agreement was wrong. And that's what I believe. And I think that we're a little different on that. I mean, I strongly agree, and most Republicans that apparently agree with me that we ought to have expanded trade. We benefit, not just from the exports we also benefit from the influence. You've got an time, so do I. We benefit in that an open market enables us to grow and still have to compete, and that keeps inflation down. One of the reasons in February we're going to have the longest economic expansion in the history of the country, and we did it with three things. We did it with getting rid of the debt deficit we did it with investing in technology and people and we did it with opening our borders in trading and continuing to compete, because usually, when you have this kind of economic growth, inflation takes over and kills the recovery. That hasn't happened. So I think this is very important. But the difference between me and most Republicans is that I believe that globalization is inevitable. But people are scared of all this change, and what we have to do is to convince them that change can be their friend. And the way to do it is to say, "Okay, we're going to compete, and we're going to win over the long run, and we're going to win in the short run. But we should grow the economy in a way that improves the environment, and we should do it in a way that respects core labor standards no forced labor, no child labor, no abusive working conditions."<stop><start>Did Seattle surprise you?<stop><start>No. I think I knew there would be a lot of people there. I was surprised the first night at the level of violence. I didn't know that there would be so many, basically, creeps there who would try to<stop><start>Who instigated it, you mean?<stop><start>Yes, throw rocks there was just a very small percentage of those thousands of people who were doing this. There were probably a couple of hundred people who were prepared to throw rocks at stores and take other violent action. Most of them were there to express their opposition to some aspect or another of this process of globalization, but they cannot turn the clock back. The world is better off than it would have been if we hadn't had 50 years of increasing economic integration, and America has won big these last 7 years by being involved. And we are making a huge mistake, in my judgment, if we don't continue to both expand trade and work for better core labor standards in a better environment.<stop><start>Do the unions then not understand this? They're the biggest supporters your party has the trade unions in America have been.<stop><start>They're divided. If you look at Seattle, for example, there are 170,000 union members in and around Seattle. And most of them have jobs in part because their companies are so tied to trade. I went to York, Pennsylvania, the other day to the Harley Davidson motorcycle factory, something most at least most guys and an increasing number of women can identify with. They've got a year's backlog, and 25 percent of the Harleys are sold overseas, and the biggest foreign market is now Japan, which makes the only competitors to Harley and motorcycles. So I think it just depends. Some unions feel that their jobs might be undercut by the importation of textile or clothing goods or shoes or whatever, but on balance, we have won big as a country by opening our markets, showing we're not afraid to compete, and asking others to open their markets, too, to be fair, whether it's farmers or manufacturers or people in entertainment or people in the information technology business. Final Year of the President's Term<stop><start>Is it tough going into a last year? I ask that because we sat together here quite a few times. I remember once we were looking out, and you said to me, "You know, my bad days are good days."<stop><start>Absolutely. I love this job.<stop><start>You love this job.<stop><start>I do.<stop><start>You<stop><start>And I'll miss it. People ask me all the time, "What will you miss most? Will it be living in the White House, going to Camp David, getting on Air Force One?" The job is what I'll miss most, the work. There is no place in the world where you can come in contact with so many different kinds of people and so many different kinds of issues and have so much opportunity to do good or stop bad things from happening. But the hard thing about it now is you want to do everything, and you have to be disciplined. You have to figure out what can I do? What can I put out there that the country ought to do that maybe can't be done while I'm here? I never want to sleep. I realize the days are going by, and I just want to keep working. I just want to do everything I can.<stop><start>We'll be back with the working President right after this. At this point, CNN took a commercial break. Gays in the Military<stop><start>We are reevaluating, are we, "don't ask, don't tell?"<stop><start>Well, I think the candidates are. A lot of them are saying it should be changed.<stop><start>What do you think?<stop><start>I tried to have a different policy. I tried to say gays should be able to serve in the military<stop><start>Period?<stop><start>Without lying about it. But if the military code of justice says that homosexual acts are illegal, if they keep it, then they'd have to observe that. But when we went to "don't ask, don't tell," it was all we could get through the Congress. The Congress had a vetoproof majority to reverse the policy I recommended. Now a new administration and new Members of Congress, they're free to do something different. What we're doing now in August, we issued some new guidelines to try to correct some of the abuses, because the policy, as it was articulated in '93, has been often abused, and that's what's led to some of these expulsions, some of this harassment. The Secretary of Defense is absolutely committed to faithfully implementing the policy. It's really "don't ask, don't tell," don't pursue, under those circumstances.<stop><start>So it's not the policy that's wrong?<stop><start>No, I didn't say that. I recommended a different policy, but the policy is better than the results. That is, if the policy were faithfully applied, we would not have many of the problems that we've had these last few years. And I think the Secretary of Defense and the leadership of the Pentagon is now with these new guidelines and with the work they're doing to try to make sure people are trained and they understand they're not supposed to go in and harass people and what can and cannot trigger an inquiry, I think we can make it better now. Gay and Lesbian Rights<stop><start>How much we know about your interest and the gains we've made in the racial area and still a long way to go. How are we doing in that area, in the homosexual area in this country, with regards to acceptance, do you think?<stop><start>I think we've come a long way. We're a long way from where we were just in '92 and '93. I think vast majorities of the American people support hate crimes legislation that protects gays as well as people with different racial and religious backgrounds. I think most Americans strongly support nondiscrimination in the workplace and would vote for the employment nondiscrimination act if they were in Congress. I hope that the Congress will vote for it this year, this next year. I think that the real problem, I still believe, is the absence of open, personal contact. I think<stop><start>We don't know it<stop><start>I think there are too many people who don't know gay men and lesbian women in the ordinary course of their lives, and they don't see that there are people who their friends, their sisters, their brothers, their sons, their daughters, their co workers, and that it is my judgment is it's not a lifestyle people choose. It is the way people are. It's too hard it's too hard a life for people to just up and<stop><start>Why choose it?<stop><start>up and choose it. I think that and I think that my view is that every American that works hard, obeys the law, plays by the rules ought to be treated with dignity and respect and have a part in our American family. That's what I believe.<stop><start>Do you agree with the Vermont judiciary that while marriage may be wrong, they are entitled, couples who live together who are gay, to equal benefits?<stop><start>I do. I think that's a good thing. That's always been my position, that you've got gay couples that, for example, have been together for years now. One of them and I'm beginning to think about this, because I'm moving into this age bracket now one of them has a heart attack one of them gets sick one of them is in the intensive care unit in the hospital and only family members can come in and sometimes they're not allowed in that kind of thing. You know, I think that, in terms of health care coverage at work or in terms of property and willing of property to your closest family member, that sort of thing, I think they ought to be able to do that.<stop><start>But not marry?<stop><start>Well, marriage in our culture and to me has a certain connotation, meaning for me, that has not gotten me to where I could accept that, because I think it's basically a union for the purpose of, among other things, having children, and so that's why I've never supported the term of marriage, although there are a lot of increasing numbers of people, even in the clergy, who believe that they should be able to do that.<stop><start>We'll be back with more of President Clinton. We've got an overview here on the millennium and some other things after this. At this point, CNN took a commercial break. Reimbursement of Legal Fees<stop><start>We're in the Cabinet Room at the White House with President Clinton. Touch some other bases. The Washington Post said that you're applying to the Government to reimburse for legal fees. True?<stop><start>That's not true.<stop><start>Not true?<stop><start>Not true. I've never I've never considered doing that.<stop><start>So where did that story come from?<stop><start>I think it was leaked from the Independent Counsel's Office. That's the way the story read to me. But<stop><start>You don't want<stop><start>I think that they've cost the taxpayers enough money already.<stop><start>So even if you were entitled legally<stop><start>I may be entitled to it, but my instinct is not to do it. But I've really never had a discussion about it. My instinct is not to do it. I've been very fortunate. I've had this legal defense fund people have helped me pay for my legal fees. The travesty in this thing is the way the law is written. You can only get your legal fees if you're a target of an investigation but you're not charged. So if you're charged and acquitted, you can't get them, and if you never were a target, you can't get them. So the thing that I think is just tragic is you have no idea how many completely innocent people that were harassed repeatedly and called into hearings and called into this, that, and the other thing. Everybody knew they never did anything wrong, but I mean, not just one interview which you could understand but over and over and over again, so that they have these massive legal bills, and they're not eligible for any reimbursement at all. So I've been trying to figure out how to help them pay their legal bills. That's what I wish I could apply for. I wish there was some fund where I could get some money for them to pay their bills, because a lot of these people, they're not President they're not like me they can't have a legal defense fund that would pay their bills off. Independent Counsel's Investigation<stop><start>How did you emotionally hold up through all that?<stop><start>I'm here. Laughter<stop><start>I know. What is it? Some sort of inner thing in you, get up off the floor, the comeback kid approach? Is that part of your structure? Where does that come from?<stop><start>I think there are two things, really. One is what you said. All my life, I was raised to believe that you should never give in and never give up. If somebody hits you and knocks you down, you were supposed to get up, not give up. And I also deeply believed one thing I knew, the Whitewater thing was a total fraud, and I thought the people who were pursuing it knew it was a fraud at some point. They had to, especially 4 something years ago, when the Government report came out, the RTC report saying that neither my wife or I had done anything wrong and had detailed millions of dollars in explanations showing that. The other thing was that I'm in the last couple of years, I had to come to terms with a lot of things. I prayed a lot I thought a lot I sought a lot of advice. I had a lot of help from really good people, here and around the world. A lot of the people I served with, world leaders, called and talked to me.<stop><start>Are you surprised at that?<stop><start>I was touched by it beyond belief. Some of the conversations I had with people like Nelson Mandela, I've carried with me all my life. It's just unbelievable.<stop><start>They were there for you?<stop><start>Yes.<stop><start>And that was part of the<stop><start>But here but also, letters I got from, you know, kids around America. You wouldn't believe the letters I got from<stop><start>Really?<stop><start>Yes, unbelievable letters. And letters I got from religious leaders and people that taught philosophy and thought about these things. It was just and I also had a lot of counseling, a lot of help from these ministers who came in and met with me, and my wife and daughter had a lot to do with it. Hillary and Chelsea had a lot to do with it. Former Advisers in the Media<stop><start>Are you hurt by the Dick Morrises, the Stephanopouloses who write books, who write columns, become part of the media sometimes, in Morris's case, often a very critical a guy you were pretty close to? Does that hurt you?<stop><start>Well, first of all, I am very grateful for the overwhelming loyalty that I've enjoyed from people who could have made a lot of money by dumping on me because that's what sells and the kind of media culture they were in. And I have enjoyed an extraordinary degree of it. I've also had a lot of stability. A lot of people have stayed with me the whole time. So let me start with my gratitude. When Dick first started going on television and saying those things, he used to call somebody here in the office and apologize in advance and just say, "You know, I've got to do this. It's the only way I can get on television."<stop><start>Really?<stop><start>Oh, sure. I mean, it's a game. It's a game. I know that. And so it's hard for me to take it seriously. I think that a lot of the things that he has said, he knows downright aren't true, and I feel bad for him because I think you pay a terrible price when you do that over and over and over again.<stop><start>You feel bad for him?<stop><start>Yes, I do. I feel really bad for him.<stop><start>He's attacked your wife a lot, too.<stop><start>Yes. And he's said a lot of things that he just knows aren't so. And so I feel badly for him. But I don't I can't be mad at him. With George, it's a different story. I think he's a brilliant man and basically a good person. But when George entered politics, he entered as a boy wonder. He came right in with Dick Gephardt, you know, and he assumed great responsibilities because he's a person of he works like crazy, and he's smart, and he's basically good hearted in a lot of ways. But he was, I think, always affected by being basically a Washington politician. I remember when I was attacked in the New Hampshire primary, and everybody said, "He's dead, and he ought to get out," and all that, George was asking, "Well, should we withdraw?" And James Carville and I, who grew up in the country, you know, out there with the folks, we looked at him and said, "George, if the people want me to withdraw, they will withdraw me at election time. That's what you've got elections for." And I think that I think he's probably more comfortable now being a part of the professional critics of the Washington establishment, the media establishment. I think that's where he's I think he's comfortable there. That's where he started in politics, and I think that's just where he is. Criticism of the President<stop><start>Do those pundits in general bother do they get at you? Some guy Truman wrote that famous note when he got mad. Some people let it slide off.<stop><start>I've got that note, you know.<stop><start>You have the actual note?<stop><start>Yes. One of the great little stories of my Presidency is Steve Forbes gave me that letter that Truman wrote.<stop><start>Steve Forbes?<stop><start>I've always been grateful to him.<stop><start>SOB he called that writer.<stop><start>Yes, he said, "You'll need a new nose, a lot of beefsteak for black eyes, and perhaps a" laughter<stop><start>Do you ever watch "Larry King Live" or "Meet The Press" or somebody do you get mad?<stop><start>No, the truth is I never watch them. I never watch the Sunday talk shows.<stop><start>You don't watch Sunday morning?<stop><start>Never. And the only time I ever see any of these other programs is if I'm channel surfing late at night and I happen to run into them. I watch your program sometimes when you're interviewing somebody I want to hear from.<stop><start>But basically, you don't turn on "Meet The Press" or<stop><start>Never. Never. And if I did, what good would that do me? I mean<stop><start>Except make you mad.<stop><start>Yes. If someone if I read a column, like an op ed column, of someone who says, I think the Clinton administration policy is all wet on this for these reasons, I read that, because Benjamin Franklin said, "Our critics are our friends. They show us our faults." But I cannot you can't afford to be angry as President. If you're angry all the time over things people say about you you can be angry about what happens to the American people. But if you're angry about what happens to you, then you're wasting a lot of time and emotional energy that belongs to the American people. And you're not going to make good decisions. So nothing really good can come with that.<stop><start>You really feel like an employee of the people?<stop><start>Yes.<stop><start>We'll be back with some more moments with President Clinton from the Cabinet Room in the White House. Don't go away. At this point, CNN took a commercial break. President's Legacy<stop><start>We're back with President Clinton. I want to read something that was given to me today. The last time not the last time, we've been together many times, but the night Vince Foster died, you were on television together, in this building. We were the last two to know about it.<stop><start>Yes. We were going to go another half hour, and McLarty came on and said, "You can't do it."<stop><start>Mack McLarty came in and said, "You've got to get off now." And you were mad. Why? Because you even said, "Am I not doing well?" But anyway, that aside, the last question to you that night was called in by someone asking you, even though you had only been a year, less than a year in office, what do you think your legacy will be? Here's what you said "I'll be happy to tell you. Number one, I'd like to get the economy moving again." This is 6 years ago. "Number two, I'd like to provide health security for all Americans. Number three, I want my national service plan to pass to open doors of college education to millions of Americans. Number four, I strongly want to pass a welfare reform bill that will move people from welfare to work. And five, I want to reform the political system." Reading this, how have you done?<stop><start>We've done well.<stop><start>Three out of five.<stop><start>Yes. And we've made we've done some really good things in health care we just haven't been able to have universal access. And I finally got I'm very proud of this we had 100 percent of my party vote for the McCain Feingold campaign finance reform. So we now have unified the Democratic Party for our campaign finance reform, and it's just a question of whether the other party will come along now. So I think that will happen. I feel very good about what's happened these last 6 years. We've done a lot of other things as well, and we've been able to advance the cause of peace in Northern Ireland, the Middle East, the Balkans. President's Disappointment<stop><start>Biggest disappointment?<stop><start>I don't know what the biggest disappointment is. I'm sorry we were not able to have more progress in health care, but we may have some this year. The main thing is I feel this enormous gratitude because I think our country is ending this century on such a high note, and I really do think we built our bridge to the 21st century. Hillary Clinton's Senate Campaign<stop><start>And are you going to campaign for Hillary?<stop><start>If she wants me to, and if I can be helpful, I am. But I think that there's a time for that. I think in the beginning people want to know who she is, what she believes, what she will do as a Senator, and they'll want to see her. And I need to be as supportive of her as I can. There will come a time when I can perhaps help her in the campaign. The people of New York have been wonderful to me, and I'm very grateful for that. But they want to make an independent judgment about her, so I have to be careful about when I do it and how I do it. But if and when I can help, I will do whatever I can to help, because first of all, for her, I want her to win. But secondly, she would be absolutely unbelievable if she were a Senator. I mean, it would be unbelievable. It would be such a gift for the people of New York and America. I've never known anybody, ever, who had her combination of intellect and passion and organizing ability and absolutely consuming devotion to public service.<stop><start>Our common friends in California tell me you were going to move to New York, you and Hillary, no matter what.<stop><start>That's correct. She told me when we got elected in '92, I said, "Okay, ever since we've been married, we've lived where I wanted to live we've done what I wanted to do. Now, when we get out of here, I've got to go home I'm going to build my library and build my center, but that's my gift to my State. And I'm going to spend some time there, and we'll spend the rest of the time wherever you want to say." And she said, "I want to go to New York." That's what she told me when we moved up here. I bet it was the first week or 2 we were here.<stop><start>Seven years ago.<stop><start>Yes.<stop><start>Happy holidays.<stop><start>Thank you. June 20, 1999<stop><start>Mr. President, hello, and let me express my gratitude for your interview.<stop><start>Thank you very much. I'm glad to do it. Russian Participation in KFOR<stop><start>And let me start with this question. For the past week and a half, relations between Russia and the West have been complicated by the unexpected deployment of the Russian peacekeepers to Pristina. What was at the heart of the disagreement between Moscow and the West regarding Russia's participation in KFOR? How did you overcome this disagreement?<stop><start>Well, first of all, let me say that this entire difficulty in Kosovo has been a great test for the relationship between the United States and Russia, but it is a test, I believe, that both countries have passed on your part, thanks to the leadership of President Yeltsin and the work that our foreign ministers and defense ministers have done, the work that Prime Minister Stepashin has done. I don't know that there ever was much disagreement about Russian participation. I said from the beginning that I strongly felt in order for the peacekeeping force to have credibility and full impact, Russia would have to be a very important part of it. And the agreement we have reached regarding Russian involvement in terms of leadership over the airport and being involved here in three different sectors I think will enable all of us to achieve our objectives to bring the Kosovars home in peace and security, and to make sure that the Serb minority as well as the Kosovo Albanian majority are both treated freely and fairly. Meeting With President Boris Yeltsin of Russia<stop><start>Today, Mr. President, you met with Russian President Yeltsin. What questions did you discuss, and what did you manage to agree on?<stop><start>First of all, we discussed Kosovo. We talked about what a difficult challenge it had been to our relationship, and we both committed to implement our agreement in good faith in a way that will, I think, reflect credit on the leadership and greatness of Russia and the Russian people, and on those of us who are working with Russia in Kosovo. Secondly, we discussed the importance of continuing our efforts to reduce the nuclear threat and the threat of proliferation of missile technology. And we agreed to work together on that. Among other things, President Yeltsin said that he hoped that START II would be ratified by the Duma, and that we would begin soon parallel discussions on START III to take our nuclear arsenals down even more and on the ABM Treaty. Then, the third thing we discussed was the need to do more to try to support economic development in Russia, to get Russia qualified in the IMF program and, of course, that requires some action in the Duma. And I expressed my strong support for IMF assistance to Russia, as well as for help on the Soviet era debt problem and some other things that can be done, I believe, to boost Russian economic prospects and help the lives of ordinary citizens in Russia, which all of us think is very, very important.<stop><start>Mr. President, let me ask you this. Both in Russia and in the West, the question of Yeltsin's health, President Yeltsin's health constantly comes up. How did you find Mr. Yeltsin today?<stop><start>Today he was strong, clear, alert, vigorous. He stated Russia's case very forcefully on every issue, and we did what we have done in all of our meetings we've now had 17 meetings in the last 6 1 2 years. We had an agenda we reached agreements and we committed to go forward. So I would say, today he did very, very well. He has acknowledged from time to time that he's had some health problems, but in all of my conversations with him about Kosovo, and especially today, I found him to be alert and very much on top of his responsibilities. Russia U.S. Relations<stop><start>Mr. President, let me ask you about this. NATO's operation in the Balkans has led to manifestations of anti Western and anti American sentiments in Russia. What are you planning to do to improve America's image in Russia's eyes, and what kind of specific concrete steps will you take to improve relations between Russia and the U.S.?<stop><start>Well, first, I hope that this interview will help to some extent by giving me the opportunity to clarify my country's position and our commitment to a strong, successful, democratic Russia, fully participating in world affairs and a leadership role, and fully integrated into Europe in the major economic and political institutions that will be so important to the welfare of ordinary Russian citizens in the new century. Second, I think that as we work together in Kosovo and as you are able to bring to the Russian people the facts of the horrible atrocities committed against the Kosovars by Mr. Milosevic's forces, the nightmares that are so much like what we saw in Bosnia before the United States and Russia and others went in there, at least perhaps the Russian people will understand what was behind what we were doing. We sought no political or economic advantage, we sought no change in the balance of power worldwide. We were only trying to reverse ethnic cleansing and genocide. And now it is something we are doing together with the Russian forces. So I hope that will help. And finally, I think it's very important that we get back to our larger agenda to reducing the nuclear threat and the burden and it imposes on Russian as well as American people to reducing the threat of the proliferation of dangerous weapons technology and to building up the Russian economy in ways that benefit ordinary Russian citizens. These are things that are in the interest of the American people, things we are deeply committed to. And I believe as we continue to work on these things together, I would hope that the feeling the Russian people have for the American people in the United States will warm up again, because we strongly want our partnership with Russia to endure and to be felt in the hearts of ordinary citizens in both countries. Aftermath of Situation in the Balkans<stop><start>Mr. President, with regard to NATO's operation in the Balkans, let me ask you this this question is asked by many people nowadays. Does it not seem to you that the actions of the United States and NATO show some sort of double standard I mean, that America doesn't act, say, in the Balkans the same way as it does in Kurdistan or Rwanda and other regions of the world where authorities are conducting a policy of genocide or national oppression of minorities?<stop><start>First, let me say<stop><start>Will NATO be just as I'm sorry to interrupt you<stop><start>Yes?<stop><start>will NATO be just as firm with the KLA, for example, as it has been against Serb forces if they try to take over Kosovo or endanger the Serb population?<stop><start>The answer to the last question has to be yes, and a strong yes. Our commitment, as I said from the beginning, is a Kosovo in which no innocent civilians were subject to death, uprooting, or oppression. Our commitment, therefore, now must be to give equal protection to all the innocent civilian citizens of Kosovo. And I would just note that KLA has agreed now to demilitarize, to give up its large weapons, to suspend any kind of military operations or training, including even the wearing of the uniforms. So we will have to be vigilant, but I am pleased with the progress of that. And I want to say again, I am committed to protecting all the people of Kosovo, and one of the reasons that I wanted the Russians to come in and first have a partnership is so that the Serbs, as well as the Kosovar Albanians, would feel that the KFOR force was committed to their protection and that they would all try to live together again. It's going to be hard a lot of horrible, horrible things have occurred. But we will work with them and we will do our best to help reconcile the civilians who had no role in the wrongdoing, to help them reconcile to one another. Response to Genocide and Minority Oppression<stop><start>And as far as the first part of my question?<stop><start>The first part of your question, I have spoken to quite extensively in America. First, America did actually play a very major role in preserving an area of protection for the Kurds in northern Iraq for several years after the Gulf war. And we have, several times, intervened to try to help protect the Kurds and will continue to be sensitive to that. Secondly, I have said repeatedly that the slaughter of the Rwandans, the genocide in Rwanda occurred in the short space of about 100 days, and we were caught flat footed. I feel terrible that we did nothing. And I would hope that if anything like that develops in Africa again that the United States and Russia, indeed, all the major powers of the United Nations would move aggressively to try to stop it. We should not countenance genocide or ethnic cleansing anywhere in the world if we have the power to stop it. That's not to say that we can expect all people of all different ethnic groups to always like each other and never even to fight. But when innocent civilians are subject to mass slaughter and ethnic cleansing, if we can stop it, we should. Russian Role in Balkan Peace Negotiations<stop><start>Let me ask you about the role of Russia in the Balkans peace deal more in detail. There are basically two views. Some believe that NATO was forced to turn to Russia for help because only Russia could sit down with both sides and convince Milosevic to accept the peace deal. Others believe that the West could have avoided turning out Russia and only did so out of good will and a desire to preserve Russia's role in the Balkans. What is your point of view?<stop><start>I would say there's a little bit of both there. The United States and the other NATO authorities do view Russia with good will, not ill will, and we do want and believe Russia should appropriately have a role in the Balkans. But also, I always believed if we were going to get a diplomatic solution here, we had to have Russia's involvement. Keep in mind, before the bombing began, for 14 months we worked closely with the Russians to try to find a diplomatic solution in the Balkans, because we knew that Russia's positive influence would be essential. Then, when it appeared that the diplomatic solution might be possible and could bring an end to the bombing and bring the Kosovars home, President Yeltsin was willing to appoint Mr. Chernomyrdin. He then came to us and made it clear that he would like someone who could represent the rest of Europe in these negotiations, and President Ahtisaari of Finland became his partner. And I believe that the Russian people should be very, very proud of the role, the indispensable role that Russia played in these diplomatic negotiations, and the role of Mr. Chernomyrdin in particular. He and President Ahtisaari did a very, very good job, and it's something that I think is a great credit to Russia and to the people of Russia. G 8 Summit Financial Aid to Russia<stop><start>And there's probably now one last topic that I wanted to dwell upon. Today is the last day of the G 8 summit. The Western press usually refers to it as G 7 plus Russia, even though more than a year ago in Birmingham, Russia was officially admitted, accepted to the club of the world leading nations. Is Russia, in fact, a full fledged member of the G 8, or is it still early to talk seriously about this because of Russia's economic weakness? And is the U.S. going to pressure the IMF to provide credits to Russia, and is the U.S. going to help Russia's economy apart from IMF?<stop><start>Let me try to answer all of your questions. There is a G 8 now, not a G 7 plus one. It is a G 8 Russia is a full member.<stop><start>Please do it.<stop><start>The communique that we issued today, which covers a wide range of economic and social issues, was fully participated in by Russia. The Russians had a full hand, along with all the rest of us, in developing this communique. And President Yeltsin was at the meeting today when the leaders went over the sections and, in effect, ratified and said we wanted it out there. So I think you can feel quite good about that and about the fact that there is a G 8 and Russia is a full member of it. Secondly, you ask about the future and whether we would pressure the IMF to help Russia. The answer is that we have always strongly, strongly supported IMF assistance to Russia. We also strongly, however, support the changes that the Duma has been asked to make in order to give Russia a competitive world economy. Because no matter how much the IMF tries to help Russia, unless your country has made the basic changes that every country must make to compete in the global economy, the private money will not flow into Russia that will really bring it back to the position that the Russian people deserve and that, frankly, the rest of the world needs. It's very much in the interest of the United States to have an economically successful, strong, prosperous Russia. And I will do everything I can to that end. And your third question was whether there were things apart from the IMF that we could do to help the Russian economy, and the answer to that is yes. And I discussed some of those with President Yeltsin today. I want you to understand that the United States believes that a strong and prosperous democratic Russia, actively involved with the rest of Europe, actively involved with the United States, actively working together in partnership to solve the world's problems, from terrorism to the threat of weapons of mass destruction to the need to stop ethnic cleansing that this is in our interest. We do this because we genuinely want the Russian people to have a leading role in the world and to have personal prosperity, because we think it gives us a safer world and it's better for the American people.<stop><start>Mr. President, thank you for your time, thank you for your answers, and I wish you good luck.<stop><start>Thank you. January 21, 1999 Terrorist Use of Weapons of Mass Destruction<stop><start>Before you ask questions, I just want to say that I really have appreciated the stories you've done, because I think it's so important that it's sort of a balance thing, but I want to raise public awareness of this and awareness also with people with influence who can influence decisionmaking without throwing people into an unnecessary panic. And I think these stories have been exceedingly valuable. Sandy was making fun of me today before you came in Sandy Berger was. He said, "When you started talking about this 6 years ago, nobody around here people just didn't they hadn't thought about it."<stop><start>Six years ago.<stop><start>I've been asking them to think about this for a long, long time. And of course, we had it more or less in the context of terrorism because we had the World Trade Center and all the other things to worry about. But anyway.<stop><start>But actually, one of my first questions because we've heard so many rumors about how you got interested, and none of what has happened would have happened without your interest. But what was it?<stop><start>Well, it was first of all, I spend a lot of time thinking about 5 years from now, 10 years from now, 15 years from now. I think that's one of the things that Presidents are supposed to do and especially when things are changing so much. But we had keep in mind, we had the World Trade Center issue we had the CIA killer and then later you had the incident in the Tokyo subway and then Oklahoma City. We've had a lot of terrorist incidents, culminating in the bombing of our Embassies in Africa and what happened in Khobar, other things. One of the things that I have worried about from the beginning, with the breakdown of the Soviet Union before my time here, was how to help them deal with the aftermath of the massive nuclear system they have, and starting with the Nunn Lugar funds, going all the way up to our threat reduction proposals in this year's budget you know, we tried to hire keep the scientists and the labs working and do joint projects of all kinds that would be constructive. But it was pretty obvious to me that, given the size of the Soviet biological and chemical programs and the fact that we know a lot of other nations are trying to develop chemical capacity and some biological capacity, that we had not only nuclear problems but we have a chemical and biological problem. And of course, the Vice President and others sort of sensitized me to this whole computer problem. We had the incident with the defense computers just a few months ago. But before that, I kept reading about all these non in the line of national security all these computer hackers. You know, I'm technologically challenged. I can do E mail and a few other things, you know. But it struck me that we were going to have to find some way to try to deal with that, too, because of the defense implications, as well as the other possibilities. And I've had all kinds of I also find that reading novels, futuristic novels sometimes people with an imagination are not wrong Preston's novel about biological warfare, which is very much based on<stop><start>"Hot Zone" or "Cobra Event"? Which one impressed you?<stop><start>"The Cobra Event."<stop><start>That's the one.<stop><start>Well, "The Hot Zone" was interesting to me because of the Ebola thing, because that was a fact book. But I thought "The Cobra Event" was interesting, especially when he said what his sources were, which seemed fairly credible to me. And then I read another book about a group of terrorists shutting down the telephone networks in the Northeast and the Midwest.<stop><start>What was that? Do you remember?<stop><start>I can't remember. I read so many things. I can't remember. A couple years ago. But anyway, when I and a lot of times it's just for thrills, but a lot of times these people are not far off. You know, they sell books by imagining the future, and sometimes they're right sometimes they're wrong. So I've gotten I don't want to sound I've gotten a lot of sort of solid, scientific input. I've also solicited opinions from people working on the genome project, for example, and about what the implications of that might be for dealing with biological warfare. And last year, we had a whole group of experts come in here and spend an extended amount of time with me and then follow up with the staff on biological issues in particular. So I've had a real interest in this, and I think we're about to get up to speed. But we just have to be prepared for it. I mean, it's if you look back through all of human history, people who are interested in gaining control or influence or advantage over others have brought to bear the force of arms. And what normally happens, from the beginning of history, is the arms work until a defense is erected, and then there's an equilibrium until there is a new offensive system developed, and then a defense comes up going all the way back to well, even before it, but castle moats which were overcome by catapults. And so, basically, I think what has concerned me is that we, because we're moving from one big issue will there be a nuclear war between the United States and the Soviet Union to now a whole lot of proliferation of issues, dealing with smaller scale nuclear issues, chemical and biological issues, missile technology, and of course, the related computer cyber crime issue is that I just don't want the lag time between offense and defense to be any longer than is absolutely necessary. That, I think, is the challenge for us, is to try to before anything really tragic happens not only in the United States but anywhere else. We've had enough warning signs out there now, enough concrete evidence, and we need to close the door of the gap between the offense and defense.<stop><start>How worried should we be, and how we don't want to panic people. And research has seen some of these warning signs, and readers call, and they want to know, is this how worried should we be? Is this serious today, and is the threat rising? Is it going be more serious in the future?<stop><start>I would say that if the issue is how probable is it in the very near term an American city or community would be affected, I'd say you probably shouldn't be too worried. But if the issue is, is it a near certainty that at some time in the future there will be some group, probably a terrorist group, that attempts to bring to bear either the use or the threat of a chemical or biological operation, I would say that is highly likely to happen sometime in the next few years. And therefore, I would say the appropriate response is not worry or panic but taking this issue very seriously, expecting all elected officials with any responsibility in this area to know everything they can, and to do everything we can both to erect all possible defenses and then to try to make sure we are doing everything we can to stop this. Now, we know right now we know that a lot of what we've done already has delayed WMD programs, some of which I can't talk about, but slowed the development of WMD programs, of missile technology development that might deliver such weapons and other things. And we're doing everything we can to stop or slow down the ability of others, insofar as we know about it and can do something about it. And meanwhile, we're doing everything we can both to develop defenses and emergency responses. But I think we've got an enormous amount of work out there ahead of us, an enormous amount of work. And a lot of this has to be done with great cooperation between the Federal Government we need cooperation of the private sector on the cyber issues, the computer issues. We need cooperation with local government on public health response issues, exposure if there appears to be an outbreak. We had all these sort of false alarms of anthrax in California how many? more than a dozen, I think, in the last month. So we need to be able to diagnose and to treat and also to manage those things. Chemical and Biological Weapons<stop><start>Does one of these threats worry you more than another, and does any one in particular keep you awake at night?<stop><start>Well, I have spent some late nights thinking a lot about this and reading a lot about it. I think in terms of offense versus defense, if you go back to where we started, the thing that I'm most interested in and you will see we've allocated several hundred million dollars basically to research and to applied research the thing that I'm most interested in is developing the ability to quickly contain biological agents. A chemical attack would be horrible, but it would be finite. You know, it's just like for the people who went through Oklahoma City, nothing could be more horrible. But it didn't spread. The thing that bothers people about biological agents is that, unless they're properly diagnosed, contained, and treated, that it could spread. For example, we know that if all of us went to a rally on The Mall tomorrow with 10,000 people, and somebody flew a low flying crop duster and sprayed us all with biological agents from, let's say 200 feet, that no matter how toxic it were, half of us would walk away, for reasons no one quite understands. You know, either we wouldn't breathe it, or we'd have some miraculous resistance to it. And the other half of us, somebody would have to diagnose in a hurry and then contain and treat. Otherwise, it would be kind of like the gift that keeps on giving, you know. Laughter And I don't mean that I'm not trying to be macabre, but you asked me what keeps me awake at night, and that bothers me. And that's why the thing that I thought was most important about what we did last year, and what we learned a little bit from our defense scare even though it was on a computer issue, we had this defense issue, plus we were dealing with all this we'd studied for a year all this especially this biological issue is we had this work going on in 12 different places in the Government. So we had to organize our efforts so that we could be accessible to local governments, so we could work with them to set up their own preventive mechanisms. And I have to tell you, it may be we may have to await it's a note I made to myself that we may have to have a perfect defense, I mean, instantaneous. We may have to depend upon the genome project, interestingly enough, because once the human genes' secrets are unlocked, then if you and I think we've been infected, they could take a blood sample, and there would be a computer program which would show us if we had, let's say, we had a variant of anthrax. Let's suppose some terrorist hired a genius scientist and a laboratory to take basic anthrax and put some variant in it that would be resistant to all known anthrax antidotes.<stop><start>Okay. Or a Russian scientist.<stop><start>Yes. So let's just suppose that happened. And what you would want is to be able to take a blood sample, do an analysis, put it through a software program that had already been developed, and say, "Okay, here is this is how the genes are different. This is the difference." And then presumably, not too long after we've developed this, they will already know, well, therefore, this is how you should how you should change the vaccine. And we know now I know this is kind of bewildering, but keep in mind this is actually good news because, if there were no genome project, if there were no rapid way to do quick analysis that would go right to the tiniest variant, we would be in trouble. And now these scientists are working on this, and we're actually a little bit ahead of the original predicted timetable on unlocking the secrets of the gene. And when that happens, one of the side benefits, I think, will be to be able to tell these things much more quickly. But meanwhile, we've got this plan. We're stockpiling the vaccines, and we're doing all this research which the Government has to fund, because obviously there's no market for it, right? It's not like there's no market for it, and I hope there never will be any market for it. But we have to pay, the Government has to pay for this research to develop new vaccines and to manage it along. And I think we will do I think we've got a very good increase in the budget, and I really think it will have broad bipartisan support.<stop><start>There's a school of worrywarts out there that says this genome stuff is a double edged sword, and at some point you can envision ethnic weapons, looking at racial differences and try to do selective<stop><start>And targeting.<stop><start>Look at Kosovo. Look at how much of the blood that has spilled is just rooted in this ethnic<stop><start>Yes, but I think to be fair, we're a good ways away from that. I think we need to worry far more about the fact that most of these groups we know, for example let's take something I can talk about because it's public record. We know Usama bin Ladin's network has made an effort to get chemical weapons.<stop><start>Biological or just chemical?<stop><start>Well, we know they've made an effort to get chemical weapons they may have made an effort to get biological weapons. We do not know that they have them. It is true if you take this thing out to sort of the science fiction conclusion, obviously the genome project itself carries the seeds of its own misuse. But right now I'm absolutely convinced that the advantages dwarf the disadvantages in this area. Plus, which all the other advantages of it I mean, it's going to lead us to we will save countless lives because we'll know in advance what predisposition people have, what problems they have the genome project would be the seminal event you know, when it's done, of the first part of the 21st century, there's no doubt about that. But to come back to your point, the only point I would make, whenever you ask me a question like that, I think it's best for you to remember the formulation that I started with, and it's interesting to think about the moat and the catapult, the spear and the shield anything. It's all a question of people who have money, organization, and an interest, whether it's political or financial or religious or whatever, in oppressing other people or holding them down, will always be looking for new offensive weapons. Our goal should always be, for the sake of the world as well as the security of the American people, to make sure not only that we can defend ourselves and counter punch, if you will, but to develop with each new wave of technology to close the gap between offense and defense. And if we do that, I think that's the strategy that I hope will become at least an integral part of our national security strategy in the WMD area. Anthrax Vaccinations<stop><start>Mr. President, in the interim we have a lot of Americans, more than 2 million Americans in uniform, being vaccinated against anthrax. Are you vaccinated?<stop><start>The Secret Service told me I couldn't discuss that, and they have good reasons for not wanting me to do it. But let me say, I'm convinced that like any other vaccination, there may be some small rejection, but I think on balance it's a safe procedure. I've looked at the reports, and I think on balance, given the fact that we send so many of our men and women in uniform into places where they could be exposed, I think that they're better off being vaccinated. I do not believe that the threat in the United States is sufficient that I could recommend that to people, to the public at large.<stop><start>What about first responders or people in hospitals who might be exposed to smallpox, anthrax, plague, and things like that?<stop><start>The real answer there is, we haven't reached a conclusion, but we're considering that. Because we have to work with the first responders, we've got the public health people looking into this and other people, and I think that that's a judgment that ought to be made primarily by people who are in the best position to make a professional judgment about it. So that's something that's being considered. Response to the Terrorist Threat<stop><start>We've heard about something else that's being considered that I think Bill wants to ask you about.<stop><start>As you may be aware, Secretary Cohen and people at the Pentagon are talking about trying to create a new position of commander in chief for the continental United States because of the terror threat. And it's moving through the system, and at some point it's going to come to you, probably sometime this summer. Are you inclined to create that kind of position for the military?<stop><start>Let me say, I think that we need to have an organized response, if you will, to what you might call "homeland defense" on CBW and cyber or computer terrorism issues. And now we've established a national coordinator on these issues in the White House. We've got this national domestic preparation office at the Justice Department. We've got a National Infrastructure Protection Center. We've got a joint task force on cyber defense already at DOD in response to what they went through before. So I want them to look at where we are and make some recommendations to me. I'm not sure that that is what they're going to recommend, and I think that I shouldn't give an answer to the question you ask until I see what the range of options are and what the range of recommendations is.<stop><start>Do you have a leaning one way or another?<stop><start>No, just except to say that it is very important that we outline every single responsibility that we have as a nation at the national level and that someone be responsible for it. I want to know as I said, one of the things that we learned last year that I think was a legitimate criticism of what we have done in our administration is that we had 12 different places where these activities were going on, and they weren't being properly coordinated and driven in the proper fashion. And we've tried to resolve this. And this is sort of the last big kind of organizational piece, as far as I know, that is yet to be resolved. So the military is going to make me a recommendation, and I will respond accordingly. Again, the American people this shouldn't be a cause for alarm this should be a cause for reassurance. They should want us to be wellorganized on these things because remember, for years and years, when I was a boy, we used to do all those they had all these fallout shelters, and every school had its drills and all that. I mean, I'm older than you, so you wouldn't remember this, but<stop><start>No, we did it.<stop><start>But you know, and we it was a sensible thing to do under the circumstances. Thank God we never experienced it. But it was the sensible thing to do. And so what I want us to do is everything, within reason, we can to minimize our exposure and risks here, and that's how I'm going to evaluate this Pentagon recommendation. Secretary Cohen, I think, is also real focused on this now. I've been very pleased with the priority he's given it. And I think that all these guys know that after their experience with the computer issue that all this tomorrow's threats may be very different from yesterday's, and we've got to be ready.<stop><start>What do you say to people, to skeptics who say all this is just Pentagon maneuvering, creating new bogeymen to scare us so they can whip up new budget authority? And it's and that's a large crowd.<stop><start>Even though we're talking about hundreds of millions of dollars and in the aggregate a few billion dollars, it's nowhere near as expensive as maintaining this sort of basic infrastructure of defense the case of public health, the basic infrastructure of public health. I say to them, they should understand that we have intelligence and a lot of it is in the public arena, you all write about it about all the countries that are trying the countries and the groups that want chemical weapons, that want biological weapons, that are trying to get agents, precursor agents that you can use to develop chemicals or basic agents you can use to develop biological weapons. And everybody knows now the world is full of hackers that seek to intrude on networks, that seek to insert bogus codes into programs, and all this sort of stuff. And it would be completely irresponsible for us not to allocate a substantial investment in trying to protect America from threats that will be, in all probability, as likely or more likely in the future than the threats we think we face today. That's why we started this conversation by saying, I don't want to say anything that will overly alarm anybody. I'm not trying to stir up a lot of false threats. But if you look at just what the UNSCOM people in Iraq they say that they don't believe that the reporting in Iraq is consistent with what they believe the chemical capacity there is. If you look at the fact with regard to chemicals, with the Chemical Weapons Convention, if we can get it properly implemented, at least we will be able to track probably, that plus intelligence, large volumes of chemical stocks. But with biological stocks, a very small laboratory with the right materials to work with, you could develop supplies that could kill a large number of people. It simply is irresponsible for us not to both do the best we can with public health protections, do the best research we can on vaccines, stockpile what we know works, and then get out there and try to build a defense and an ability to interrupt and stop, with export controls and any other way we can, these developments. And it costs money. But to me, it's money well spent. And if there is never an incident, nobody would be happier than me 20 years from now if the same critics would be able to say, "Oh, see, Clinton was a kook nothing happened." I would be the happiest man on Earth. I would be the happiest man on Earth. If they could say, "He overexaggerated it nothing happened all he did was make a bunch of jobs for scientists and build the Pentagon budget," I would be elated 20 years from now to be subject to that criticism because it would mean that nothing happened, and in no small measure because of the efforts we've made. Russia<stop><start>Since we have so little time left, Mr. President, Russia. How can you be sure since they violated the treaty that they signed banning biological weapons for 20 years, does it make sense to work with them now on biological projects? Are you certain that they are not doing biological research? And what do you do?<stop><start>Let me say this. I think that the more we work with them and the more their scientists are working with us and the more successful we are in building a common endeavor, the more it will be in their interest to comply. The real danger in Russia, I think dangers are two. One is I'll take one that is outside the CBW area so it doesn't look like I'm waving the red flag here. When we started the space station you know, John Glenn went up and then we sent the first two components of the space station up it had been months since a lot of those Russian scientists had been paid. That's why it is very, very important, I think, to say we value this enormous infrastructure of scientific expertise they have in the space area, in the CBW area, and we want to work with them. This budget of mine would enable us to do joint work with 8,000 Russian scientists. Now, there are, I think, 40,000 total we think. But that's important. That bothers me. The second thing that concerns me is that when Russia shed communism, they adopted a strategy which was widely lauded at the time in the United States and elsewhere, but they were actually when I went to Russia, and you remember right after my mother died I got on the plane, and I went to the Czech Republic and Russia that was, what, January of '94. Actually, at that time the Czech Republic was doing very well and was sort of the poster child of the new economy in the former Communist countries. But when I was there, Russia had actually privatized more property than the Czech Republic had. And this relates partly to the economic crisis, but when they did it, they did it without having had the benefit of an effective central bank, a securities and exchange commission, all these other things, so that you had money coming in and money flying out now. And one of the problems they have now is that it's not a totalitarian Government anymore there are a lot of private companies all the private companies there by definition used to be part of the state, unless they're new businesses. And so one of the problems we're having is, even when they're trying to help us, is keeping up with what all these companies and their subsidiaries do. And that's been the tension that you've written a lot about and there's been a lot in the press about was there missile cooperation with Iran or not, and does that violate our understanding, and does that call for some action visa vis Russia? And part of the problem is just keeping up with this proliferation of companies and people that used to have some connection to the Soviet State, some connection to the defense apparatus. It's not a simple process, and it's not a perfect process, but I am absolutely convinced that this threat reduction initiative we've got can kind of intensify our efforts to work with them, as well as to really implement the Chemical Weapons Treaty and get some teeth in the Biological Weapons Convention. That's very, very important. I think that is the best strategy. It may not be perfect, but it is better than the alternative. Response to an Attack<stop><start>What do you do if the nightmare comes to pass, and some country hits us, hits us hard, with a biological weapon? What kind of response would you do?<stop><start>Well, first of all, if some country were thinking about doing that, I would certainly hope that they wouldn't have the capacity to do it before we could stop them or interrupt them, if it was a that is, if you're talking about somebody lobbing a missile over here or something like that. I think if it happened, it would be an act of war, and there would be a very strong response. But I think we've demonstrated that. But I think the far more likely thing is somebody representing some interest maybe it could be a rogue state maybe it could be a terrorist network walking around a city with a briefcase full of vials or in spray cans, you know. So what we have to do any country with any sense, if they wanted to attack us, would try to do it through a terrorist network, because if they did it with a missile we'd know who did it, and then they'd be sunk. It would be that's a deal where they're bound to lose, big time.<stop><start>Would you respond with nuclear weapons to a biological attack?<stop><start>Well, I never discuss the nuclear issue. I don't think that's appropriate. But I think that we would have at least a proportionate, if not a disproportionate, response if someone committed an act of war against the United States. That's what we would do. And if somebody willfully murdered a lot of our civilians, there would be a very heavy price to pay. Senate Impeachment Trial Presentation by Senator Dale Bumpers<stop><start>Mr. President, you have time for one more<stop><start>We're about to go. Did you have a chance to watch any of Senator Bumpers' presentation today?<stop><start>I did. It's the only thing I've watched. I watched that.<stop><start>He said he criticized the House managers for lacking compassion for your family. He described your family as a family that has been "about as decimated as a family can get. The relationship between husband and wife, father and child, has been incredibly strained if not destroyed." Is that an accurate representation?<stop><start>Well, it's been I would say it has been a strain for my family. But we have worked very hard, and I think we have come through the worst. We love each other very much, and we've worked on it very hard. But I think he was showing you know, he knows me and Hillary and Chelsea, and we've all been friends, as he said, for 25 years. I think he was just trying to inject a human element into what he was saying. November 19, 1998 Opening Remarks Tetsuya Chikushi. We have our special guest today who has the biggest influence and responsibility to the future of humankind. We have this most important bilateral relations, and he's the most responsible person in all of the United States. We are very happy to have him, to greet him with a large number of audience. Mr. Bill Clinton, the President of the United States. Mr. President, welcome to our program, and I appreciate your choice to join us. It's really an honor. I will skip any more ceremonial remarks inaudible . To begin with, you have something to say to the people.<stop><start>Yes. I will be very brief so that we can leave the most time possible for questions. But I would like to begin by thanking you and this station for making this program possible. I thank all of you for participating and also those in Osaka who are joining us. I would like to open by just emphasizing some things I think we all know. First, the relationship between the United States and Japan is very, very important to both countries and to the world. We have a very broad partnership in the security area, in the political area, in the economic area. Over the years, there is sometimes greater emphasis on one issue than another. Over the years, sometimes America is having particular problems sometimes Japan is. But the enduring nature of our democratic partnership across all the differences between our peoples is profoundly important. And on the edge of this new century and a new millennium, when there is so much change in the way people work and live and relate to each other, it will become more important. That's why I'm here and why I wanted to be a part of this townhall meeting. And I thank you very much.<stop><start>Thank you very much. There are about 100 people here and 30 people in Osaka, the second largest city, and everybody wants to discuss with you, to make some questions. And also, we gathered questions nationwide through Internet and facsimile. To start with, I would like to ask some casual questions, and I would like to expect a brief answer. From now on, I'd like to speak in Japanese. We have many questions from children, many of them with inaudible . I will pick one from the fifth grader of the primary school "Did you have good grades at school when you were a kid?" Laughter<stop><start>Mostly. Laughter<stop><start>Next question. Chelsea Clinton<stop><start>Inaudible when Chelsea, your daughter, was born, how much were you involved in baby raising, child raising?<stop><start>I'm sorry, would you read<stop><start>How much were you involved in raising her?<stop><start>When my daughter was born, how involved was I with her? I was very involved with her from the time she was a very small baby, and always going to her events, working with her on her homework until it became too difficult for me laughter and trying to be a big part of her life. So, my wife and I both tried to be very involved in her life, and we still try to be, although she has reached an age where I don't think she thinks it's always such a good idea. Laughter Public Speaking<stop><start>I am very bad in speaking in front of large number of people and also the same question from the junior high school student how can you speak so well in front of the large number of people? Could you give us some tip?<stop><start>My only advice is to imagine, no matter how many people are in your audience, that you're speaking to a few of your friends because, look at the camera, the camera will take us to millions of people. I have been in crowds the largest crowd I've been in was in Ghana in West Africa. We had maybe 400,000 or 500,000 people. But on the television, there are millions. And if you're in a big crowd, well, the microphone is your friend. You can speak normally because the sound will carry. And I think many people have trouble speaking in public because they think they have to change. And you don't have to change. You just have to be yourself. Imagine you are at home, entertaining some friends, sharing something with your family, and speaking the way you would when your heart was engaged and your mind was engaged about something you cared about in your own life. That's my only advice.<stop><start>Well, thank you. So, that being said, let's go into our Q A session. So you spoke very well as President. Now talk about leadership and about your personality. I would like to welcome questions regarding leadership or his personality or the President as a person. Pressures of the Presidency<stop><start>I'm involved in welfare. I am sure you feel a lot of pressure being President. Have you ever felt that you wanted to get away from these pressures? And also, how are you coping with these tremendous pressures as President?<stop><start>Well, of course, sometimes you want to get away from it. But I think the important thing is not to be overwhelmed by the work, that only people have these jobs and you have to take some time for family and some time for recreation. I spend a lot of time reading. I probably read more than I did before I became President. I exercise every day. I play a lot of golf, not as much as I wish but some, and certainly not as well as I wish. Laughter And I try to stay in touch with my family members beyond our home and also my friends around the country. And all these things help to keep balance in my life. I try to make sure on the weekends I spend time with my family. I take time to attend my church services. I do the things that remind me that I'm a normal person and I need a balanced life. And I think that's important. President's Legacy<stop><start>I work for Kirin Beer Company. Thank you very much for this great opportunity. I really appreciate it. And I would like to congratulate you on the result of the midterm elections back in the United States. Now, my question You're the 42d President of the United States. What would you like people in the future to remember you for?<stop><start>I would like to be remembered for having restored American confidence and opportunity, prepared America for the 21st century, and deepened America's partnership with people around the world to create a world more full of opportunities for ordinary citizens, more committed to preserving the environment, and more committed to working together for peace and prosperity. I believe we're moving into a world where our interdependence with one another will be critical to maintaining our independence, as nations and as individuals. And I would like to be remembered as a President who prepared my country and the world for the 21st century. And I like your beer. Laughter Japan's Leadership<stop><start>I'm inaudible from Sony Corporation inaudible in Japan the leadership is not as good as we would like it to be. What do you think inaudible ?<stop><start>Well, first of all, I think that, to be fair to the present leadership, Prime Minister Obuchi and his team, they have not had enough time for people to make a firm judgment. They just recently took office. That's the first point I would make, because the difficulties, the challenges Japan has today will not be solved overnight. For example, when I became President in 1993, I had to make some very difficult decisions. And in the midterm elections in 1994, like the ones we just had, between the Presidential elections, my party suffered great losses. And people who voted for the tough decisions that I advocated, many of them were defeated because the people had not yet felt the benefits of the things which were done. So the first thing I would say is, do not judge too harshly too quickly. The second thing I would say is, I think that the big things that have been done here are essentially moving in the right direction, the banking reform, stimulating the economy. The third point I would make is that for leadership, you need first to know what is going on you have to have a clear analysis of the present situation. Then you have to have a vision of the future you're trying to create. Without a vision, the rest of this doesn't matter. Then you have to have an action plan to achieve the vision. And then finally, in the world we're living in, where we do things like this, you must be able to have all kinds of ordinary citizens be able to buy into it, to support it, to say, "Yes, this will be good for me, good for my family, good for my future I wish to be a part of this." And that, I think, is the great challenge of modern leadership how to mobilize large numbers of people, even if unpopular things have to be done. Monetary Rewards and Public Service A participant commented that while many business leaders had amassed great wealth over the past 6 years, the President could not do so, given his income as President. He asked what kept the President motivated since he could not seek a third term.<stop><start>Well, first of all, you're right I can't run for a third term under our laws. It's a good thing, because if I could, I would, I think. Laughter I like the work very much. But I think, first of all, people who get into public service must have a decision that they are not going to make as much money as they could make if they were doing something else. However, it is important that we pay them enough money so they can at least support their families, raise their children, pay their bills. Beyond that, I think that most people who are in public service should just be content, if they can raise their children and pay their bills, to think that when they get out of public service, they can do a little better. And that's the way I've always looked at it. It never bothered me that I didn't make much money. That's not what was important to me in life. And I think that as long as there are rewards to public service in terms of being able to achieve what you wish to do that is, help other people, help your country move forward I think good people will wish to do it. I don't think that money will ever be able to attract quality people to public service. But if you expect people to starve, you can drive good people away.<stop><start>Then we'll switch to Osaka. I guess they are waiting inaudible which is known for the shrine of the merchants we have 30 people here they are very vigorous Osakans. And 15 involved in retail business and 15 ladies that are present here, waiting for the opportunity to ask questions. We will start from a man. First Family<stop><start>I'm involved in the metal business. Mr. President, out of the dishes that your wife cooks, what do you like best, and how much do you eat with your family a month? How many times do you eat with your family a month?<stop><start>Well, of course, our daughter has now gone to university, but my wife and I have dinner together every night when we're both home. That is, unless she has to go out to an engagement or I do, we always have dinner together. I would say probably 4 times a week we have dinner together, and maybe 3 times a week one of the two of us is out at night or out of town. Over the last 20 years, of course, it's fairly well known in America that I like all different kinds of food. A lot of people make fun of me because of that. But I suppose my favorite dish is a Mexican dish, chicken enchiladas. That's what I really like the best, although I like sushi, too. Laughter<stop><start>Very nice to meet you. I have two children. I am a housewife. So nice to meet you, or talk to you. I have a question regarding Miss Monica Lewinsky. How did you apologize to Mrs. Clinton and Chelsea? And I'm sure I would never be able to forgive my husband for doing that, but did they really forgive you, Mr. President?<stop><start>Well, I did it in a direct and straightforward manner, and I believe they did, yes. Laughter But that's really a question you could ask them better than me. Okinawa<stop><start>Thank you very much. We'll go back to you, our viewers in Osaka. Let's change the topic now. Now our bilateral relationship is the most important of all bilateral relationships. Let's talk about U.S. Japan relationship. We collected about 4,000 questions from all over Japan, and the most popular questions were regarding Okinawa, American base issue of Okinawa. There are two independent countries, allies, but one country has the military presence in another country for a long time in such a large scale. Is it good for our relationship? Isn't it going to be a thorn of one side, so to speak? How do you feel about that, Mr. President?<stop><start>Well, first of all, I think there have been, obviously, some difficulties in the relationship in our military presence in Okinawa. Some of them, I think, are inevitable, and I'm very respectful of the challenges that our presence has caused the Government and the people on Okinawa. On the other hand, both the Government of Japan and the Government of the United States agree that our security partnership is a good one and that we cannot say with confidence that there are no circumstances under which American forces would ever be called upon to defend Japan or our common allies. And if we were to move our forces back to Guam or to Hawaii, it would take them much, much longer to come anywhere in the northeast Asia area if there were difficulties. So the question is, if we do need to be here for some period of years, how can we do it in the way that is least burdensome to the people of Okinawa? That has been my concern. I have worked now with Prime Minister Obuchi's government and with predecessor governments to try to be responsive to that. And I hope we can do that. I hope we can continue to ease the burden on the people of Okinawa but stay as long as both Japan and the United States agree that is wise for us to stay. Military Conflicts<stop><start>Related to the previous question, the new guidelines have been developed, and Japan, of course, is not supposed to go into war. But once the United States gets into the war situation, I'm afraid that Japan might be sort of pulled into that, also, and I've been concerned. Can you comment on that?<stop><start>Yes. Of course, our strategy is to maintain a presence in the world so that there will be no war, so that there is a strong disincentive for anyone to drag anyone back into a war. There have been so many wars in Asia in this century, but in the last two to three decades, there has been an increased emphasis in the Asian countries on working on the economy, working on the society, working on the education of children, working on trade and other relations with people instead of military relations. And my hope is that America's military strength will be used to deter any further military action so that we will have more peace, and in the decades ahead, war will become more and more unthinkable for everyone. That is what the whole defensive military strategy of our country is designed to do. Japan U.S. Trade<stop><start>I will ask about trade. Now, we are asked by the U.S. Government to further open our market. Do you have any Japanese made product which you daily use, Mr. President?<stop><start>Yes, we have some Japanese televisions we also have at least one European television, I think, in the White House complex. And I have, over time, owned a number of them. When I was a Governor of my home State, we had a Sanyo plant in my home State that put together televisions that were mostly manufactured in Japan and the component parts sent there. So I'm quite well familiar with that, and I think it's very important. Actually, we've worked hard on trying to keep our markets open during this period of economic difficulty, not only for Japan but for all of Asia. And you may know that our trade deficit has gone way up with Japan, with China, with others. Because of the Asian economic crisis, we're buying more exports, but no country can afford to keep buying imports from us if the economy is down. And on the whole, the American people have supported this. It's our contribution to trying to stabilize Asia and bring it back. I have to say in all candor, there are some problems. Japanese imports into America of hot rolled steel, for example, are up 500 percent in one year, and no one quite believes that that's just because of the economic problems. But by and large, there's a commitment in America to keeping open markets and purchasing Japanese products. Let me also say, I believe that in addition to the financial reforms, which I think are very important to carry out aggressively, and the economic stimulus, domestically, I think Japan could get a lot of economic benefit in terms of new jobs, from greater openness. I'll just give you two examples. In our country there was great controversy about deregulating and opening investment to international investors in airlines and in telecommunications. We did it. It was quite controversial. But we have created, as a result, far more jobs in both sectors because of the greater competition. Just since 1993, when we've been aggressive in telecommunications and a lot of international firms have been a part of this we have seen hundreds of thousands of jobs created in America because of the increased competition. So I think it would be good for the Japanese economy. Let me say, I never consciously asked Japan or any other country to do something that is good only for the United States. My belief is that our country is strengthened if Japan is very strong, because if Japan is very strong, that brings back Asia. If Asia is strong, that's good for the American economy. It also means it's good for stability, which means more prosperity and less likelihood of the military conflicts that I was asked about by the lady there. Japanese Economic Policy<stop><start>This is relating to our economic relationship. In Japan, the certificate or consumption coupons will be issued to children and old people. Now, including this and there are other measures to boost our economy what do you think of what Japan is doing?<stop><start>Well, I know of no history with these coupons. It's a new idea. And so, obviously, I can't have an informed opinion. But I do believe that anything that can be done to increase consumption is a good thing, because I know the Japanese people are great savers, and that is also a good thing. And I know you worry about the population getting older and having to save more for retirement. But you need a balance between saving for your own retirement and growing the economy today, because as the population gets older, one of the things that will lift up the elderly population is a very strong economy. And so I think that anything that can be done to boost confidence of consumers and to boost consumption is a good thing. Agricultural Trade A participant explained that farming in Japan was a family based operation which maintained cultural and social values, while farming in the United States was more efficient and enterprise oriented. He stated that U.S. demands for agricultural trade liberalization were therefore unfair and then requested the President's views.<stop><start>Well, first of all, let me say, this is a subject about which I think I know something. Before I became President, I was the Governor of my home State, which produces 40 percent of all the rice grown in the United States. And in our State, most of the farms are still family farms. But we see all over the world today family farmers having more trouble. For example, to show you the other side of this, in the northern part of the United States, in North Dakota, there was a huge drop in the number of family farmers this year because the Asian countries not Japan other Asian countries which had been buying their wheat could no longer afford to buy it. And a lot of them were threatened with going out of business. In fairness, one of the reasons I believe we need this WTO process is so we can have a regular way of deciding how to open the markets that should be opened in agriculture and then give countries enough notice so they can figure how they're going to help the farmers if they have a policy of wanting family farmers to survive. I can tell you, in my country we have tried to push for more open markets and a policy to keep family farmers in business by and I can only say what the situation is in America. In America, the family farmers are as productive as the big enterprise farms, but the family farmers don't have a lot of money in the bank. And we all know that because of bad weather or bad prices or whatever, some years are good in farming some years are bad in farming. The fundamental problem in the U.S. is that the family farmers need a system to help them through the bad years. The big enterprises have so much money, they take the bad years and wait for the good years. So we have tried to design a system that would address the needs of both, and we seem to be having some success there. So I think there is a proper compromise here where you can open markets more gradually, open them to farming, particularly if there are different products. There are some products that Japan buys that can't be grown in Japan. And if you can open these markets, but do it in a way that preserves to the maximum extent possible the family farms, that I think is the best way to do it. And that is what we are trying to achieve in the U.S. I don't know if we'll succeed, but I think we're doing a pretty good job now.<stop><start>Osaka is very interested in economic issues, so let's switch over to Osaka. Questions? Financing for Small Business<stop><start>I'm in housing equipment and material. Osaka has a lot of small to medium size businesses, and I boast ourselves for having supported the Japanese economy. But we are suffering right now. It's hard to get loans these days. And the first blow comes to us first. But in the United States, how are you helping these small to medium size companies?<stop><start>We have, I think, three things that I would like to mention. First of all, for small businesses that are just getting started, we have a Small Business Administration in the Federal Government which can provide guarantees of the first loans. Now we have a pretty healthy banking system, quite healthy, that is pretty aggressive in making loans to businesses. In addition to that, we have something that many countries don't have We have a very active system of venture capital, high risk capital, higher risk capital, people who will invest money in new areas or in small and medium size businesses that are just trying to expand. And having looked at the Japanese situation, I think it would be very helpful if, in addition to this bank reform, where the banks can get public money to protect depositors, and then they have to declare the bad loans and work through them I think that will help because then the banks can start loaning money again, with the depositors protected. So it's very important to implement that. But I would like to see some effort made at providing more of this venture capital, this risk capital, in Japan. And it may be that there is something we can do to encourage Japanese business people to set up these kind of ventures, because they have created millions of jobs in America, the venture capitalists have. And even though they lose money on ventures, on balance they make money over a period of years. Japan China U.S. Relations<stop><start>I am also a merchant, selling kitchen material. Looking at the recent American diplomacy, you tend to go over the head of Japanese. You're interested in strengthening diplomatic relations with China. What we are afraid of is that in 2008 we would like to invite the Olympic Games to Osaka, and a very strong rival is Beijing of China, for the Olympics in 2008. So I would like to have your personal, private opinion about this. If Beijing and Osaka compete to get the Olympics, I am sure that you will support Osaka. I'd like to make sure of that. Or would you rather support Beijing? I certainly appreciate your support.<stop><start>Thank goodness I will no longer be President, and I don't have to make that decision. Let me make two points. First of all, I did not intentionally go over the heads of the Japanese people in establishing better relations with China. I think it is good for Japan if America has better relations with China. I think it is good for America if Japan has better relations with China. The Chinese President is coming here, I think, on a state visit in just the next couple of days. And it has now been quite a long time since the last World War, and I think whatever remaining misunderstandings there are should be resolved and that your two great countries should have a better relation. And I'm going to do my best to see a partnership involving all of us going into the future. I'm not going to take a position on the Olympics. But let me say, before I became President, I spent a lot of time in Osaka because we had two companies in my State who were headquartered in Osaka. I even remember the last restaurant I ate at in Osaka, Steakhouse Ron, R O N. So if it's still there, maybe I got them some business tonight. Laughter Balancing Work and Family in Japan<stop><start>I teach social studies in junior high school. We've been talking about expanding consumption. The Japanese junior high students spend so little time with their fathers at home. They have to go to inaudible school and fathers don't get home until very late. Talking about consumption, I think if they get fathers back, I think we will get a more stable society. Because if they get more free time, then they have more leisure time they will spend more money that way. But in the male oriented society of Japan, there is very little discussion regarding more holidays. What do you think about that?<stop><start>I think, first of all, the whole world admires both the excellent education system and the hard work ethic of the Japanese people, and admires the fact that you have been able to keep the family structure as strong as you have under the enormous pressures of work and education for the children, especially during this hard economic time. But I think that in all societies which are very busy and very competitive, the number one social question quickly becomes, how do you balance work and family? I personally believe that the most important work of any society is raising children well. And if you have to sacrifice that to have a strong economy, then sooner or later your economy and your society won't be very strong. On the other hand, you don't want to sacrifice your economy in the service of raising children. There has to be a balance. We are having that kind of debate in America. I don't have the answer for Japan it would be wrong for me to suggest it. But I think you have asked the right question, and I hope maybe your being on this program tonight will spark a sort of national debate about it. It's worth asking that question, whether you could actually help the economy by providing people more free time with their children and their families. I never thought of it in this term before until you said it tonight. Thank you. Disabled Americans A participant asked the President what he planned to do for disadvantaged people in the United States.<stop><start>Thank you very much. First of all, you made a very important point. In 1992, we passed the Americans with Disabilities Act, which guarantees all Americans access to certain public facilities and other opportunities in our society. Previous to that we had tried to do the same thing with our schools, in educational facilities. And all of you know, I'm sure, about all the fights we have in America between the Democratic Party and the Republican Party, and you see all that in the press here. But you should know that one of the things that we've had almost complete agreement on in the last 6 years since I've been President, is every year putting more money into education for Americans with disabilities. In the last session of Congress, we came very close to passing a bill which would have dramatically expanded job opportunities to Americans with disabilities, over and above where we are now. So I think it's fair to say and our administration has been very involved in this our position is, every person should be looked at as a resource every person should have all the opportunities necessary to live up to the fullest of his or her capabilities. And our policy is to do whatever we can to advance that goal. We believe it makes us a stronger country.<stop><start>Thank you, Mr. President. American Visitors to Japan<stop><start>Every year many Japanese youth go to the United States for sightseeing or to study. But compared with that, not too many Americans visit Japan. That's how I feel. I think it's important that the young generation understand each other, the American youth and the Japanese youth. Why do you think it's fewer American youth visit Japan?<stop><start>I think, first of all, it's because it's a long way away in the minds of most Americans. And secondly, because we have in America, as you know, people of every conceivable different racial and ethnic backgrounds, but relatively small number of Japanese Americans a significant number we have several Japanese Americans in our United States Congress, for example. But I think that the Americans, when they travel abroad, tend to go to places where either their own people came from or they know someone in the school who is from there, or something like that. But there is an enormous interest in Japan in the United States, an enormous interest among the young people, wanting to understand the society, know more about it. And I think what we have to do is to try to facilitate more travel among older people, who have the means to travel, but more study groups among the younger people. Most young Americans could not afford to come here to study on their own. They would have to come as part of some scholarship program. And in the years since I've been President, we tried to find ways to increase the number of young Americans who could come here to study. Our Ambassador here now, Tom Foley, who was formerly the Speaker of the House of Representatives, has been very active in this whole area of trying to build greater communications and travel for a long time. And I hope we can do a better job now, because I don't think we've done as much as we should have to bring Americans to Japan, to give them a chance to get to know the Japanese people, understand the Japanese system, and build long term friendships for the future.<stop><start>A very tough question to<stop><start>Laughter Landmines<stop><start>I work for a nongovernment organization. I'm a housewife. Mr. President, there is a book, "Give Us Not Land Mines, But Flowers." You autographed this. Do you remember it? Thank you. We have been engaged in the campaign to get rid of landmines, and we have signed the treaty to completely get rid of landmines. You have not signed that. Why is that? What is your policy on landmines?<stop><start>First of all, my policy is to support getting rid of them. And there is a reason that we have not signed the treaty. I would like to explain why. Number one, the way the treaty is written, the mines that countries use to protect their soldiers against tanks, so called antitank mines, not antipersonnel mines, are protected, except ours, because of the way the wording of the treaty is. And we pleaded with the people in Oslo not to do this, but they did. They basically wrote out and they knew exactly what they were doing. Why they did it, I don't know. But they basically said that other countries, the way they designed their antitank mines was protected the way we do it isn't. The second issue is, the United States has, as all of you know very well, a United Nations responsibility in Korea. The border, the DMZ, is 18 miles from Seoul. So there is one place in the world where we have lots of landmines, because it's the only way to protect Seoul from all the North Korean Army, should they mass along the border. It is heavily marked. As far as we know, no civilian's ever been hurt there. All we asked for was the opportunity to find a substitute for the protection the landmines give the people of South Korea, and we would sign it. Let me assure you all, I was the first world leader to call for a ban on landmines. We have destroyed almost 2 million landmines. We spend over half of the money the world spends helping other countries dig up their mines. So I strongly support the goals of the treaty, and I will continue to do so. I hope if we can resolve these two problems, we can sign the treaty, because I have spent a lot of my personal time on this landmine issue, and it's very important. And I thank you for what you're doing. Thank you. Nagasaki, Hiroshima, and Nuclear Weapons<stop><start>Time is running short, so we turn our attention to the future. Something that is difficult for the people in the audience to ask, so I will do it. You have the button to destroy mankind 5 times over with your nuclear weapons. How much do you know about what really happened in Nagasaki and Hiroshima? Have you had any personal experience of getting in touch with the victims? And on that basis, you still continue to own, possess nuclear weapons.<stop><start>No, I have never had any personal contact with victims, but I have read a great deal about it. After I decided to run for President, I began to think about it much more than I ever had before. Since I have been President, I have worked hard to reduce the number of weapons in our nuclear arsenal, along with the Russians, to extend the Nuclear Non Proliferation Treaty. We were the first country to sign the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty. We are hoping that our friends in Russia will ratify the START II convention so we can immediately start on the next round of nuclear weapons reductions. So I have done everything I could do to reduce the number of nuclear weapons and the threat of nuclear war. I have implored the people of India and Pakistan not to start a nuclear buildup with each other, because I never want to see another weapon dropped. On the other hand, if you look at the last 50 years, nuclear weapons have not been used a second time, I think, because of the deterrent theory. And what I want to do is to reduce our weapons but always do it in a way that at least provides some disincentive from someone else using nuclear weapons, as well.<stop><start>Well, unfortunately, I think the time is up. Or?<stop><start>I'll take a couple more.<stop><start>There's two more questions regarding our future. How about a young person, how about over here? Teenage Crime<stop><start>I want to ask you I'm very sad these days that teenagers' crime is increasing inaudible what do you hope we can leave to our children?<stop><start>Let me ask you something. I have something to say about that, but why do you think the teenage crime is going up?<stop><start>Well, I think it is a little related to what the other guy asked you about, that no communication in the family, no father, and many times the mother does not work in the home. And this kind of no communication in the family and also the area we don't know other people, what they are doing.<stop><start>Well, I can tell you that in our country, one of the things that happened is that so many of our children were being let out of school, but they couldn't go home to their parents because there was no parent in the home. And so a lot of this crime was happening between the time school was over and the time the parents got home from work. So what we have tried to do is to turn our schools into more community institutions. And so the children can stay there for longer hours, and they can do their homework, or they can get tutoring, or they can do other things. In some of our big cities, even, they're feeding the children there, if necessary. And what we're trying to do is to create, as much as we can, opportunities to overcome the fact that many of these children don't even have two parents in the homes in the U.S. But I think the most important thing is, children have to believe that they are the most important people in the world to someone. They have to be when you're young, you must know that you are the most important person in the world to someone. It gives you a root, an anchor in life. Of course, then all the work and the study and all that makes more sense. But in the beginning you have to be valued just because you're alive and because you're in a family and because you're in a community and you matter, no matter what. I think that is important. And I worry that in all of our societies we're working so hard, we're getting so busy, we're doing so many things that that sense of the innate, inherent worth of people can be lost. We can never afford to define ourselves solely in terms of how hard we work or how much money we have or what our grades are or anything else. Children have to believe that they matter just because they're alive. And I think that, all of our societies, if we're not careful, we lose that.<stop><start>The last question I can only accept one question. Would you like to point to somebody, Mr. President?<stop><start>If I'm late, the Prime Minister will stop speaking to me, and this whole thing will be laughter go ahead. Situation in Iraq<stop><start>I have a question about you decided not to attack Iraq estimate by the Pentagon that more than 10,000 people would die inaudible .<stop><start>Well, first of all, the Pentagon estimate was not that high but it's obvious that if we had conducted a comprehensive attack directed at their weapons of mass destruction program, the production capacity, the laboratories, all the supporting sites and the military infrastructure that supports it, that unless everyone knew in advance and left the premises, large numbers of people would be killed. And I believe the United States has a special responsibility, because of the unique position of our military might at this moment in history, to be very careful in that. Now, that's why I always said if Saddam Hussein would comply with the United Nations resolutions, we would not attack. Shortly before the attack was about to begin, we received word that they were going to send a letter committing to compliance. Then we worked all day to try to clarify it, and I think it was a good thing to try to solve this peacefully. Peace is always better than war, if you can do it consistent with the long term security and freedom of the people. So I feel good about that. Secondly, I think that the inspection system offers us the best protection over the long run. But don't forget, you have suffered in Japan from the sarin gas attack. This is not an academic issue to you this is a real issue to you. And Iraq is a nation that has actually used chemical weapons on its own people, on the Iranians, on others, had a biological weapons program of some significance, was attempting to develop a nuclear weapons program. So this is a very important issue for the world, and I would hope that all the countries of the world would continue to support an aggressive stance. I hope it will not lead to military action, but we have to be prepared, I believe, to take military action because the issue is so great. I think that young people like you Japan lived in the shadow of the awful legacy of the atomic weapons, but the likelihood is that in your lifetime, your adult lifetime, and your children's lifetime, you will have to worry more about chemical and biological weapons put in the hands of terrorists as well as rogue states. You have seen this in Japan you know this. But I think if we can do something to stop it now, we should do it even if it requires military action. The gentleman behind you there. International Finance in the 21st Century<stop><start>I'm a private banker for a European bank. In a few years, in many ways, we've come through a lot. We have increased investment in the United States. However, things are changing a little bit. Now you will be the first President of the 21st century, but what do you think you have to be most worried about as we go into the 21st century in terms of economics?<stop><start>I think the biggest challenge, long term, is to adapt the international economic systems to the realities of the 21st century. The International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, all these institutions set up at the end of the Second World War have facilitated great trade and investment. But they weren't prepared for the fact that once you had trade and investment, you had to have money crossing national lines, and then that money would become a commodity traded in itself, and then it would be traded at great margins through the derivatives and the other mechanisms. Sometimes the money is traded, and you only put up 10 percent of the money you have at risk. Today, 1.5 trillion crosses national borders every day in currency trading. And we don't have a system to avoid boom and bust, to keep recession from going to depression in the global financial markets. So, long term, I think that's our big challenge. We are all working on it, and I think we'll have over the course of the coming year some very important things to do. Meanwhile, we've come up with some shortterm solutions, Japan and the U.S., with the Asia growth fund we announced the Prime Minister and I announced a couple of days ago, a precautionary finance facility to keep the financial problems from reaching countries that are doing a good job, strengthening the IMF. But over the long run, every country after the Great Depression that preceded World War II devised ways to stop those depressions from happening in their own countries. That's what you're doing here. You're just a question of whether you're doing enough to restore growth, right? But you've been able to stop things that happened all over the world in the 1920's and '30's. Now what we have to do is to develop an international system that will achieve that goal, that will allow growth, free flow of money but won't have these radical swings of boom and bust that devastated the world in the 1930's. That, I think, is the biggest long term economic challenge that we face. Closing Remarks<stop><start>Finally, you must have something to say to Japanese people.<stop><start>Well, first of all, I hope you have enjoyed this evening as much as I have. And I thank you again for your questions. I thank the people in Osaka for their questions. I thank you for your interest in your country and in our relationships with your country. I would just like to say in closing that the United States views Japan as our friend, our ally for the future. We regret that you have the present economic challenges you have, but we don't think you should be too pessimistic about the future. These things run in waves over time. Keep in mind, 10 years ago a lot of people said America's best days were behind it. And we looked to you, and we learned a lot of things from you. And we borrowed some things from you, and they helped us. And so now we're in a period of time where what we're doing is working pretty well for us and helping the rest of the world. But in the last 50 years, no country has demonstrated the capacity to change more than Japan and to lead and to emerge and to sort of redefine, continually redefine the mission of the nation. So I would first of all say, do not be discouraged by the present economic difficulties. They can be overcome. The second thing I would say is, we had a big financial crisis in America, and it cost us 5 times more than it would have to fix because we delayed dealing with it. So now you have the laws on the books. I would urge you to support your Government in aggressively dealing with the financial institutions, aggressively moving to support greater consumption, aggressively moving for structural changes that will create more jobs, because a strong Japan is good for you but also essential to the rest of Asia emerging from its present difficulties. So don't be discouraged, but do be determined. That would be the advice of a friend. I say that because we have been through our tough times we have learned so much from you. And the last point I want to make is, the best days of Japan and the best days of America lay before us in the 21st century if we determine to go there together. Thank you very much. November 02, 1998<stop><start>We go to Washington, DC, and on the line right now is the President of the United States, President Bill Clinton. Good morning, sir.<stop><start>Good morning, Tom.<stop><start>How are you this morning?<stop><start>I'm great. It's a beautiful day here, a little fall coolness in the air, but it's a beautiful day.<stop><start>It's a great day before getting out the vote. Myra J. Yes.<stop><start>It is. I hope tomorrow will be as good as today is with the weather. African American Vote<stop><start>Now, we've been talking all along about how important it is for African Americans to get out and vote. I want to go back, first of all, and let's talk about the times when black Americans didn't have the right to vote. Because I know that you came up in an era where you can remember the Little Rock Nine you can remember Medgar Evers you can remember the four little girls in Birmingham, where a lot of us only know about these events from recent movies.<stop><start>Absolutely.<stop><start>But you remember those times.<stop><start>I lived through all that. I lived through the churches being bombed and people being driven away from the polls. And then I lived through the poll tax era, where people would buy the poll taxes by the roll, and black people had to agree to vote the way they wanted and they if they could get a certificate for the poll tax. I remembered all that<stop><start>from Arkansas. And you probably heard a lot of hatred growing up in Arkansas, too.<stop><start>I did. Of course, I did. To me, the passage of the Civil Rights Act, the voting rights law, the open housing law, all those things, they were the pivotal events of my childhood as far as my citizenship goes I mean, just the whole civil rights movement. Now I see that we do at least on election day, we are all equal. As I said yesterday in Baltimore, tomorrow, whatever anybody thinks about all the challenges and problems we still have in America, every single person tomorrow is just as important as the President or the Speaker of the House or Mr. Gates at Microsoft or anybody else. Everybody shows up, and everybody's vote counts, unless you don't show up. You know what kinds of debates we've had here in Washington over the last couple of years you know what the big issues are. And the real challenge here is that if this were a Presidential year, then African American voters, Hispanic voters, working people generally single mothers who have to work for a living and figure out how to get their kids to child care or to school and work through how to get to the polling place all these folks would be voting. And it's clear, if that were the case, that we would win the congressional races handily, and we could change the direction of this country. We could end this last 8 months of partisanship we went through and really start building on the successes of the last 6 years. So what I've got to try to do is persuade enough people just to go out and vote, because this election is not an ordinary congressional election. This Congress will shape how the American people live in important ways for many years to come.<stop><start>The African American vote is real important.<stop><start>Very important. It's important because in these midterm elections, normally, African Americans do not vote in the same percentages as they do in Presidential elections. And normally the falloff is bigger than it is for hardcore Republican voters, who tend to be older, a little better off, have a little more free time, and more likely to vote. And of course, the so called Christian Coalition, the very conservative right wing of the Republican Party, they always vote. So if we want our voices heard and we want to continue the progress of the last 6 years, I need some support in Congress. We had a little more balance in Congress if we had a few more Democrats in Congress, we could pass the Patients' Bill of Rights to make sure that health care decisions are made by doctors and not insurance company accountants. We could pass Senator Carol Moseley Braun's school construction initiative to make sure that we have not only 100,000 teachers, but they're teaching our kids in modern schools and not classrooms that are all broken down buildings. We could pass an increase in the minimum wage. And we could stop this raid on the surplus until we save Social Security. Those are huge issues. And that's really what this election is all about. 2000 Census<stop><start>Mr. President, you were saying about African Americans and certainly there are a couple of things that are before the U.S. Government in the Congress, specifically, when you're looking at the U.S. census coming up and the importance of that, as well as representation in Congress, which the census obviously affecting that<stop><start>Absolutely. Let me say to everyone here listening to us, the census is not just important because it's a way of telling us how many Americans there are and how we break down, what communities and States do we live in, what are our ages, what are our incomes, what are our racial backgrounds. The census also is used to draw the congressional maps and to determine the amount of assistance that comes in education aid and other things to various States and localities. Now, all I have tried to do in this census is to guarantee that we have an accurate count. In the last census, we know we missed several million Americans, disproportionately Americans of color and Americans who live in urban areas. We know they were not counted. So all we've said is, let's take the most reliable way of doing that. The Republicans are adamantly opposed to the National Academy of Sciences' recommendations. They're opposed to the recommendations even of President Bush's own census taker. And the reason is, I think they don't want all Americans counted because if that happens we'll have a different distribution of the congressional district maps, and it will make a big difference for the long term future of our country. Now, this will happen in the year I leave office, 2000, my last year as President. But I just believe I owe it to the future as we grow ever more diverse. And this is not just an issue for African Americans this is an issue for Asian Americans this is an issue for Hispanic Americans this is an issue for new immigrants from even some of the Central European countries, countries of the former Soviet Union. All these people, if they're here, deserve to be counted. If they're citizens, they deserve to be counted and taken into account when we draw the congressional district maps. If they're legal immigrants, they should be counted so that we can give the appropriate distribution of Federal education and health care assistance and other things. President's Motivation and Goals<stop><start>You know, Mr. President, I hear you talking about things like that and the fact that you'll be out of office soon, and I just read in the paper the other day about the millions of dollars that you have allocated for African Americans and other minorities to fight AIDS. And I think that's a tribute to you and your dedication, and it makes me want to ask you what makes you keep pressing forward like this, knowing that you're going to be out of office soon? What makes you keep trying to do these kinds of things?<stop><start>Well, what would be the point of being President if you didn't use the power of the Presidency to try to solve the problems of the country, to meet the challenges of the country, to seize the opportunities of the country? When I ran for this job, I had a very clear idea of what I wanted to do. I didn't know, obviously, every decision that would be presented to me or every challenge or crisis that would come up. But I knew that I wanted to turn the country. I wanted to change our economic policy. I wanted to change our education and our welfare policies. I wanted to give more young people the chance to serve their country in national service. But all of it together was designed to create a country that was ready for a new century and a new economy and a new world. And one of the critical things about getting ready is whether every person in this country believes that we're moving toward one America. You mentioned that AIDS initiative. We got 156 million to try to do special things to reduce the dramatic increase in HIV and AIDS in the African American community, in the Hispanic community, in other communities of color. That's where the growth is now. How can we be one America if a ravaging disease like this is being brought under control in part of our population but not in another? So I think this is very important to me. I have I can rest when I'm not President anymore. I need to work like crazy till the last minute of the last hour of the last day to try to make sure I have done everything I possibly could with this precious 8 years of time the American people gave me.<stop><start>So what do you want historians to write about you when it's all over?<stop><start>I want them to say that I helped to take America into a new era, that I really prepared America for a global economy, a global society, for increasing diversity at home, for responsibilities in a world where there was no cold war but we had a lot of challenges from terrorism, from racial and ethnic and religious wars. I want them to say that I did create an America of dramatically increased opportunity for all people, an America where we were coming together more in a spirit of unity, an America that was a leading force for peace and freedom and prosperity in the world. That's what I want them to say. President's Advisory Board on Race<stop><start>You know, Mr. President, when you were talking about the Little Rock Nine and how you lived through that, and also people have said that as you have promised and you have carried through on that promise to give us a reflection in your Cabinet and those around you of America, and one of the leading things that you brought to mind is the race relations panel. And I was just wondering what the status is on that.<stop><start>Well, we are preparing right now a final book on that. I got the report from Dr. John Hope Franklin and the other members of my panel on race, and we're going to do a book on it and get it out to the country. And then we're going to continue the work. We're going to take the recommendations of the panel and work with them on the next legislative program I present to the Congress, in the administrative policies of our Government, and in continuing to find things that are working at the local level and promoting them throughout the country. I think this is very important. They did a terrific job. We've got literally hundreds of thousands of Americans involved all across America, and we're going to continue to work. I've got the report now, and we're going to be about the business of implementing it. I think it's very important.<stop><start>And that's the importance of having the Congress that you can work with, that will get that out.<stop><start>That's right. That's right. And let me say this. The real problem now is that the Congress is basically dominated by not only the Republicans, but the right wing of the party is in the driver's seat. And if we get a big turnout here and we change the Congress, the composition of the Congress, you wouldn't have to change it all that much to get enough balance in there for us to be able to take some affirmative action. If we had a few more Democrats we could do things positively instead of do what we had to do last year, which was to this year we fought a rear guard action for 9 months, and then at the very end they came in and had to deal with us on the budget. And because we all stuck together, we got 100,000 teachers we did save the surplus for Social Security we were able to get programs for children after school hundreds of thousands that was a good thing. But there is so much more we should do. And if the American people believe it's important to have modern schools and more teachers and to have the Patients' Bill of Rights, to have an increase in the minimum wage, to save Social Security, if they think these things are important and they want us to keep coming together, not be driven apart, then it's important to show up tomorrow. Voter Turnout Myra J. Do you think the Republicans are counting on African Americans not to come out tomorrow?<stop><start>Well, I think they are hoping that there will be a lower turnout among people who will vote for the Democrats, yes. They are hoping that there will be. And they are hoping there will be a higher turnout among people that they have tried to inflame, as they always do, in the various ways that they do it. Republican Campaign Ads<stop><start>And the Republican ads, certainly, have been flooding the airwaves.<stop><start>It's unbelievable. I think it's important that the people listening to us know that they raised over 100 million more than the Democrats did in their Senate and House committees and their national political committees over 100 million. And they, over and above that, they have a lot of these so called third party expenditures where just in the last 10 days they dropped another 750,000 against a congressional candidate in Michigan, a few hundred thousand dollars they dropped into a television ad campaign attacking one of our Democrats in rural Ohio. I've never seen this kind of money. But we have the message we have the issues. The country is in good shape, and we can do better. And the public agrees with us on our program, so it's basically their money and our issues and the question of who votes. And that's why this interview is so important to me.<stop><start>Radio stations, I told you I would be running long. I'm running right through the break with the President of the United States. Please hold with us.<stop><start>Bigger name. 1998 Elections<stop><start>Yes, bigger name. Laughter Mr. President, we've talked about what happens if African Americans turn out to vote tomorrow. What if we don't turn out?<stop><start>Then they'll win a lot more seats than they otherwise would.<stop><start>So we're going to be to blame if it doesn't work out?<stop><start>Well, I wouldn't say that. I mean, who knows President Kennedy once said, "Victory has a thousand fathers, and defeat is an orphan." I don't think it's worth thinking about that, but I think it's worth thinking about the difference between what you know, Carol Moseley Braun in Illinois has been behind this whole race. She has been badly outspent. She has run against someone with millions and millions of dollars who attacked her and basically refused to appear and tried to disguise his philosophical positions, which were far to the right of the voters of Illinois. She's made a huge comeback in the last week. It's amazing. One survey even had her leading by 2 points after being down by as much as 16. But it won't amount to anything unless the voters in Illinois who would vote for her show up. Senator Hollings is in a tough fight in South Carolina. We have a chance to win a Senate seat in North Carolina. Chuck Schumer in New York, Barbara Boxer in California, these are huge, huge races, and there are many more. I just mention them. In Las Vegas, Nevada, where there's a substantial African American population, we've got a congressional seat and a very important Senate seat in play. So the extent of the turnout all across America and there are 30 or 35 congressional seats that could go one way or the other, and how they go will determine the shape of this next Congress and what their priorities will be.<stop><start>And into the year 2000 and beyond.<stop><start>Yes.<stop><start>And you, personally, have a lot riding on this Congress, with all of the troubles that you're having.<stop><start>You know, I've just got 2 more years to be President, and I would like it I'll be happy to fight, just like I did this last year, if that's the Congress I have to deal with, and at the end of the year we'll get something done, just like we did this year. But it would be so much better here we have the lowest unemployment rate in 28 years, the first budget surplus in 29 years, the lowest welfare rolls in 29 years, the highest homeownership in history. The policies we've followed have been good for America, and it would be so much better now if we could just go to work and get rid of some of this bitter partisanship. The level of intense, angry partisanship that the Republicans have injected into Washington is really not good for America. I want to work with all people here who have good ideas, to go forward. It is possible to do. But it's not possible to do as long as they think they can win with huge amounts of money and divisive attacks and negative campaigns. So if we can change the balance here a little bit, then we can get everybody to work together to move the country forward for the next 2 years. And yes, that's what I'd like to spend my time on. I think we ought to be working on people's problems out there in America and not just fighting with each other inside the beltway.<stop><start>Mr. President, you talked about how good things are in the country and some people have said that they're too good and people have become too complacent to get out there and vote for any difference.<stop><start>Well, I have two things to say about that. First of all, they are good, but they can be a lot better. Yes, we have the lowest African American poverty rate ever recorded. But is it low enough? Of course not. They can be a lot better. And I have offered to Congress initiatives to dramatically improve the schools, to dramatically improve the economic prospects of inner city neighborhoods. I'd like to have a chance to pass them. Think of the need we have for this Patients' Bill of Rights. Think of how many people are out there in HMO's that are having health care decisions made by accountants, not doctors. Think of the need we have, with the biggest school population in history, to build 5,000 modern schools that can be hooked up to the Internet and smaller classes for 100,000 teachers to teach in. Think of the need we have for a minimum wage increase. You know, even with low unemployment, you can't raise a family on 5.15 an hour. And think of the need we have to reform Social Security in the right way and to preserve the Medicare program and to meet these other challenges. So my first answer is that we have a lot to do. The second thing I would say is that if everybody stays home and we have people in here who will be irresponsible and squander the surplus and risk our economic program and its stability as they did for the last 8 months here, if they tried to do that, then things could get worse in a hurry. So I believe that it would be a great mistake for anybody to stay home because times are good and to assume, "Well, the President is dealing with all these guys all right, and things are fine, and I don't really have to show up." That's a big risk that's not worth taking. We have too much to do.<stop><start>Well, that seems to be the mood.<stop><start>I don't know. I think a lot of people know this is a big election. I think they know what their priorities are, and you mentioned them. And I think they know what our priorities are. And I think they know that the Democrats are focused on the people out there in the country and not on some sort of a partisan power game here in Washington. That's what I want to get out there to the people, and if they understand that, I think they'll go. I certainly hope they will. The American people, given enough time, virtually always make the right decision. But we need people to go, because otherwise this huge, vast amount of money that's been spent in this campaign is going to beat a lot of very, very worthy people who would be very good in the Congress and the Senate.<stop><start>All right. Thank you, sir, for coming on the air and talking to us.<stop><start>Thank you.<stop><start>And we look for results tomorrow and a better day on Wednesday.<stop><start>Are you going home to Little Rock to vote?<stop><start>No, I'm not. I voted absentee already. I've already cast my ballot.<stop><start>All right, Mr. President.<stop><start>Thank you. Goodbye. October 31, 1998<stop><start>President Clinton, first of all, thank you very much for sitting down with us.<stop><start>Delighted to do it. Thank you. Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin's Legacy<stop><start>You know, it's exactly 3 years since the assassination of Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin. And Mrs. Rabin said she was rather disappointed that you failed to mention her husband during the East Room ceremony last Friday. How do you respond to that?<stop><start>Well, you know, the agreement is actually supposed to enter into force on the third anniversary of his passing, of his killing. And I think that if, in fact, it does do so, it is a fitting thing, because none of us would be here if it hadn't been for him. He really started all this in a profound way. I know that the Madrid conference started before his election, but it was his conviction and his strength and security that he conveyed to the people of Israel, I think, that made this whole peace process possible. And I never do anything in the process that I don't think about him. Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu<stop><start>Mr. President, from the tragic assassination to the current situation, Prime Minister Netanyahu might put himself at the same risk as Mr. Rabin. So perhaps it is unjustified to put pressure on him to follow the Oslo accord or the Oslo track.<stop><start>Well, I don't think there's any question that the Prime Minister has put himself at some physical risk in pursuing the peace process. But I believe that it's important that the people of Israel know that, at least in my opinion, it's a good agreement that it strengthens Israel's security needs that the agreements made with the Palestinians are fully consistent with Oslo. And the Prime Minister worked very, very hard to advance Israel's security interests. Just for example, there was the whole issue of what should be done with the people whom Israel believes have committed acts of violence and terrorism against Israelis. And I am convinced that the Palestinians will now act against these people in a way that is consistent with the agreement and that will meet the Prime Minister's and Israel's needs. So that's an example of a whole array of security advances that were embedded in this agreement. And I think all Israelis who support the peace process should support the agreement because I think it furthers the cause of peace. Palestinian National Council<stop><start>Mr. President, is it really the PNC, the Palestinian National Council, that is going to convene to revise the Palestinian covenant with your presence? Is it really the PNC?<stop><start>Well, it's the PNC plus a number of other groups. And some of these groups are embedded within the PNC that is, they're dual membership for some of the people in the Government, in the executive council, in the other councils involved. And some are outside the PNC. But among other things at that meeting, we will seek a clear renunciation of the offending parts of the charter and a general endorsement of the agreement, this whole agreement, so that the process can be seen to be going forward with the support of those who represent grassroots Palestinian opinion. The Prime Minister wanted me to support this provision, this effort, and he fought very, very hard for this, as did a number of members of his Cabinet who were there, because they thought that there needed to be a debate in a Palestinian forum, even if it was controversial and heated, which would give to the Palestinian people some evidence not only of a commitment to follow an agreement but of a changing of the heart, an opening of the heart of the Palestinians toward the Israelis. And I thought that argument had a lot of appeal, even though it was not without its hazards for Mr. Arafat.<stop><start>Because<stop><start>Because it's been 18 months since anything big has happened, and because there's a lot of he has his problems, too, among them the fact that the standard of living for most Palestinians is lower today than it was when the peace process began, because the enemies of peace keep interrupting the flow of normal life. So I agreed that if it was that important to Israel and Chairman Arafat were willing to try to accommodate that condition by the Israelis, that I would go to Gaza and address this group and ask them to support the peace and to renounce forever the idea of animosity toward and opposition to the existence of the state of Israel, and instead embrace the path not only of peace but of cooperation. President's Upcoming Visit to Gaza<stop><start>I want to ask you about your visit to Gaza. Don't you think, Mr. President, that this trip may be seen as a first step in recognizing an independent Palestinian state?<stop><start>Well, if so it would be, I think, wrong, because I have tried strictly to adhere to the position of the United States that we would not take a position on any final status issue. One of the reasons that I worked so hard at Wye to try to bring the parties together is, I thought it imperative to take this next big step along the peace process so that we could launch the final status talks and get them underway in good faith, so that neither side would seek to prejudge a final status issue. That is not what I'm doing in going there. The Prime Minister wanted me to go there and wanted us all to make this pitch. I asked them if they would make some joint appearances and if they would both make the same speech to Palestinian and to Israeli audiences. And they said they would do that. I would like to see that happen I think that would help. It would help the Palestinians to see Yasser Arafat saying the same thing to the Israelis he says to the Palestinians. It would help the Israelis, I think, also. And it would be a good thing for the Prime Minister to be able to give the same speech whatever they decide to say, just say the same thing to both communities so that no one thinks that there's any evasion or shading or anything. I think, just little things like this to open up a little awareness of the other's position and build a little confidence, I think would be quite good. Jonathan Pollard<stop><start>Mr. President, why won't you release Jonathan Pollard?<stop><start>Well, I agreed to review his case and to take the initiative to review it. I have not released him in the past because since I've been President in the two previous normal reviews that is, the ones that were initiated by his request for clemency the recommendation of all my law enforcement and security agencies was unanimously opposed to it. But the Prime Minister felt so strongly about it and I might say, every Israeli Prime Minister I have dealt with on every occasion has asked me about Pollard. Yitzhak Rabin did, Shimon Peres did, and Prime Minister Netanyahu has.<stop><start>But you argued pretty you had pretty harsh exchanges with Netanyahu, reportedly, about that?<stop><start>No. I thought then, I believe now, and I think the public opinion in Israel bears this out, that it was in Israel's interest to do this agreement on its own merits because it would advance the cause of Israeli security and keep the peace process going. I think there's been a lot of reporting about this with which I don't necessarily agree. That's no criticism I just want to tell you my perception. Bibi Netanyahu argued strongly for Pollard's release. He made the arguments that anyone who knows a lot about the case and thinks he should be released would make. But I took no offense at that. He was representing what he believes to be the interest of the State of Israel. And he did it in you know, he doesn't make arguments halfway. You observe the Prime Minister, he's an aggressive person he fights hard for what he believes. I took no offense at it at all. And I would ask you all to remember, when evaluating reports that tempers were frayed or strong language was used now, remember, the three of us, Mr. Arafat and Mr. Netanyahu and I, we were there for over 8 days. Most nights I was there, I went home at 2 and 3 o'clock in the morning. The last time we were there on this last day, I was up for 39 hours and so were they. Now, I'm amazed that we didn't have more disruptive conduct and more harsh words, given how exhausted and frayed we were. But it shows you how hard the parties were trying, on the one hand, to make peace, but on the other hand, to protect their security interests. Particularly, I think, that was Mr. Netanyahu's concern. He was desperately trying to find a way to make peace or to advance the peace process that would enable him to go home and sell it to his Cabinet and his constituency. And this Pollard issue was very important to him. But I took no offense at that.<stop><start>But still, Mr. President, there were many reports that you were very upset with Mr. Netanyahu and were quoted saying that his behavior was despicable.<stop><start>That report is not true. That's just inaccurate. And this is the first opportunity I've had to say that. There was a moment in the negotiations when the two guys split apart, and there was an issue raised that I thought was wrong. And I said so in very graphic terms. But I never used the word "despicable" to describe the Prime Minister. I did not do that. There was a moment where I thought there were various moments in these negotiations when I thought at least from my perspective, trying to be an honest broker they were both wrong. You would expect this over 8 days. But at that moment, the issue at stake had nothing to do with Pollard. It was an issue, a dispute between the Palestinians and the Israelis it had nothing to do with Pollard. And it is true that there was a moment in which there was a heated exchange in which I said something rather graphic, but I did not adversely characterize the Prime Minister in the way that's reported. Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin<stop><start>I'd like to talk about the late Yitzhak Rabin. I think you know, Mr. President, that when you said the phrase, shalom chaver, "goodbye friend," I think you touched many many Israelis in a very, very special way. And we've been curious, how did you come up with this? I even noticed you have a pin that says shalom chaver on your desk right here in the Oval Office.<stop><start>Yes. I have many Jewish Americans working for me here, and they all knew how close I felt to Prime Minister Rabin. And they all knew how heartbroken I was when he was shot. And we were everybody was sort of coming up with ideas. And Shimon Peres later told me that he had not seen those two words used together before because chaver, it's sort of a special word it goes beyond normal friendship. And one of my I wish I could say that I knew enough Hebrew that I came up with it, but one of my staff members suggested that I say it. And they explained it to me, what it meant, and it seemed to be perfect for what I was trying to say. I must say, for me, that was more than a political loss. I felt very close to the Prime Minister, to Mrs. Rabin. I got to know their children, grandchildren. And I think always when I'm pushing the peace process forward that I'm doing it not just for myself but maybe also a little for him. And I must say, in these last negotiations I was very pleased to see that Prime Minister Netanyahu I saw in his eyes, I could almost see in his eyes the moment when he really made the decision that, well, maybe the Palestinians were going to make sufficiently specific security commitments that would be on a sufficiently clear timetable that he could sell not just to the Israeli public at large but to a decisive portion of his own constituency, which is a very different thing, as all of you know better than I do. And he could see that, that he could personally believe that it would advance Israel's security. And I saw that look in his eyes. I felt from that point on that eventually we would get an agreement. And that's the look that you want to see in a leader's eyes in a situation like that, because I still believe that the right formula is peace and security, and that you really can't have one without the other. But I also believe I told Mr. Arafat once during these negotiations that we had to get to the point where Israel and the Palestinian Authority had the same enemies and that they felt that if they couldn't get to be friends, at least they could be comrades and that if we could fulfill a role there, in the way this agreement was written, to build confidence between them on a daily basis, then that would be a good thing for us to do.<stop><start>Do you think, Mr. President, that things might have been different today if it wasn't for the assassination?<stop><start>Yes, of course they might have been. But it's hard to know and pointless to speculate. The main thing I think that is important for me, at least from my perspective as an American President and a friend of Israel, it's important for me that the people of Israel know that I watched these peace talks at Wye unfold, and that I believe that the Prime Minister and the members of his Cabinet who were there and his staff were trying their best to advance the cause of Israel's security. I believe that they would never have agreed to this, no matter how much I asked them to do so, if they were not absolutely convinced that it was a real advance for security and that, therefore, if we can launch the final status talks, we can redeem the sacrifice of Rabin and all the other people who have died and given and given and given to secure Israel's place and future. May 16, 1998 Northern Ireland Peace Process<stop><start>Let me start by thanking both of you for sharing some time on what is obviously a very busy day. We're in the closing days of the campaign for the peace initiative in Northern Ireland, and suddenly there seems to be apprehension, a lot of opposition. You see some slippage in the public opinion polls, the critics saying that you see these people, terrorists, criminals, at rallies being hailed as heroes. Each of you, if you could share your thoughts on what you think of the tone of the campaign, and do you share that apprehension? And how do you counter the message of those who say, vote no? Prime Minister Blair. I think before we get a vote as important as this, there is bound to be a lot of apprehension, consideration by people, and it's right that they treat this seriously, because it affects their future. And one of the fascinating things is there has been very little debate in this referendum campaign about the institutional structure, the Northern Ireland Assembly, the relationship with the Republic of Ireland, because the thing has wrecked every attempt to have a peace agreement in Northern Ireland for the past 50, 60 years. Instead, people are worried, as you say, about things like prisoners. But as I say to people, when you look at the facts, these guys who were out on the platform the other day under day release schemes, they were done years ago. The vast majority of prisoners will be out within a few years anyway. And in the end, people have got to look at the package as a whole and say, "What is the best for the future to have stability and prosperity and the chance to bring up your children with some prospect of staying in Northern Ireland and doing well, or to slip back into the ways that Northern Ireland knew for decade upon decade of division and bitterness and hatred?" President Clinton. I think some of the reservation has come from people who wonder Well, is there some sort of trick here can somebody have it both ways can they be part of the political life of the country and can they sort of condone violence? And I can tell you, at least from America's point of view, the answer to that is no. Anybody who resorts to violence will have no friends in the United States. I don't care what side they're on or what their heritage is or what their previous ties are. And I think I can speak for the overwhelming majority of Irish Americans in both the Catholic and Protestant communities, that all we have ever wanted was a just peace. This peace embodies the principle of consent. It gives the Irish people of both traditions the right to chart their future in Northern Ireland and to make of it what they will. I think, if it is embraced, you'll see a big increase in involvement of Irish Americans and other Americans eager to invest in Northern Ireland, eager to lift prosperity and to show people the benefits of peace. And so I very much hope that they will take that leap of faith and ask themselves a simple question What is the downside risk of going forward? It is so much lower than the downside risk of blowing this opportunity.<stop><start>You, at one point, considered visiting at the end of this trip, going to Northern Ireland, to the Republic of Ireland, decided not, perhaps that it would be viewed as meddling. Now in the last 24 to 48 hours, you've decided to speak out again forcefully, publicly. Why did you feel that necessary? And in your view, what role can you play in that process? And sir, what role do you think the people of Ireland will consider as they listen to the American President? President Clinton. Well, I decided to speak out because I think that the people of Northern Ireland know that I care a lot about the peace process, that the United States has been involved in it, that we've tried to not only I think it's important to point out not only has Mr. Adams, the Sinn Fein leader, been to the United States a lot, but I have spent far more time with Mr. Trimble and other leaders, Unionist leaders, than any American President ever has. I've tried to listen to both sides, to learn, to just encourage them to make their own peace and chart their own future. And so I think it's appropriate for me to speak out. I just was afraid if I went there I can remember when people from outside used to come to my home State and try to influence elections. It never worked, because in the end voters instinctively know they have to live with the consequences of their decision. So that's different. But if a journalist like you asks me a question about what I think the arguments are, I think that it's important for me to answer. And I hope that people on all sides of the issue will listen to what I have to say, because at least I have some experience here I know something about this. I know something about what happened in Bosnia I know something about what happened in the Middle East I know something about people who are divided and the difference in peace and war, or peace and sort of purgatory with violence. And peace has unfailingly been better, in the toughest of circumstances.<stop><start>As to people who actually get a vote listen to him, your friend, why should they listen to him? Prime Minister Blair. I think people do listen because people know the President is sincere, deeply committed, and actually knowledgeable about what has happened in Northern Ireland. And I can say, right from the time I became Prime Minister, but actually before that when the President visited Northern Ireland in 1995 I think it was, that his visit made a huge impact. People felt that he was someone that understood. Perhaps more than any other American President, people really feel that President Clinton both understands, knows, and people, they can also feel his willing them to do well. And I think people certainly will listen to that very much.<stop><start>As you look forward to this vote, take us back if you will. You have described this process as agonizingly difficult. In the last few hours, you had a series of transatlantic conversations yourselves. Mr. President, you were on the phone with Mr. Adams I believe twice, Mr. Trimble at least once, John Hume. Can you take us inside those conversations, pacing, raising your voice? You had people on each side that, "Nevermind, I can't do this. I'm going to back out." How did you keep it together, and how did you interrelate personally as you went through this process? Prime Minister Blair. Well, I don't think it was so much a question of raising our voice or obviously, these are conversations that you have with people at a particularly difficult moment, and you don't go right back over them the whole time. But I think in many ways what I found was tremendously useful in respect to the President's intervention was that people did and do respect his views on it, because, obviously in part, he's the President of the United States, but actually it's more to do with him personally, having shown commitment all the way through, having listened to all sides in the conflict, and therefore having some standing because of this own personal commitment, some credibility, if you like, to say to people, "Look, the eyes of the world are upon us. Let's see if we can go for this thing and make it happen."<stop><start>And as Thursday night turned to Good Friday, at any point did you think This isn't going to happen it's going to collapse? Prime Minister Blair. I'm afraid I thought that pretty regularly, at about hourly intervals. But in the end I mean, what always comes back home to me is we're 2 years off the year 2000 there is so much happening in the world, so many changes that I've seen in the last 10 or 15 years of my lifetime. I can't believe 2 years off the millennium that a place like Northern Ireland, which has got this extraordinary potential, where the people are tremendous people, as you know if you've been there, I cannot believe we can't find a way to live with each other 2 years off the new millennium with all the changes in the world, with all the possibilities there are. So even though a lot of the time I was sitting there thinking, "Can we really make this happen," I have a sort of inner optimism about it.<stop><start>And what was your message in those phone calls? You were probably half asleep as you started some of them. President Clinton. Well, first of all, I just when I talked to Prime Minister Blair or Prime Minister Ahern or George Mitchell, I was mostly listening. But when I talked to the parties, what I heard from them actually was very like what you're hearing from the general public now. It was sort of the darkness before the dawn. It was like, "Okay, we made this deal, and oh, there's a few things down the road that we'd like to improve," but what they really needed was not me to talk about the specifics what they really needed was for me to remind them of the big picture, that it was time to join hands and jump off the diving board together and get in the pool and swim to shore. And I say that not in a disrespectful way but in a respectful way. It's very hard, once you've been estranged from people for a long time, to overcome your fears and distrust. And as I have said repeatedly, I'll never forget Prime Minister Rabin telling me before Israel signed the agreement with the PLO, that everybody was reluctant to do it, but you don't make peace with your friends. You have to make peace with those and then make them your friends, because of the estrangement of the past. That's what I want people to think about. If every voter in Northern Ireland says, "What are we going to look like in 2000, and what's it going to look like in 2010," Britain here Mr. Blair is the President of the EU in this cycle. Britain leading the united Europe Ireland a part of the united Europe with one of the best reforming economies, the Republic of Ireland Northern Ireland, where Britain and Ireland join in some sort of fashion no matter what decision they make. Now, they're going to be at the vortex of something very, very big, if they can just liberate themselves it could change the past. They don't have to give up their traditions they can value them. They've agreed to the principle of consent. They have set up a mechanism by which they can chart their own future. What remains is really just to take the leap of faith and realize that the risk of going forward is infinitesimal, tiny, compared to the risk of letting this opportunity slip away. Nuclear Proliferation in South Asia<stop><start>We're short on time, so if I could ask each of you in closing, tensions in another part of the world have been a major theme of discussion here at your meeting, the Pakistani Prime Minister today saying he was disappointed in the communique relating to condemning India for the nuclear test. If I could ask each of you your reaction to that and how you see that process going forward in the days ahead. Prime Minister Blair. It's a very strong statement in the communique, condemning the Indian nuclear tests and, what's more, putting strong pressure on India to sign up unconditionally for the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and the Non Proliferation Treaty. And I urge Pakistan now, as we all do in our communique, not to follow them down that route because the world is a dangerous enough place as it is, and we fear for the future if these nuclear tests carry on. President Clinton. Well, first, it's the strongest possible statement we could have gotten. Some of our members are philosophically opposed to the imposition of sanctions under virtually any circumstances. And as you know, the United States, Japan, Canada, perhaps others will follow, did impose economic sanctions. But it's a strong statement. What we have now to do is to build on it. We have to tell the Pakistanis, "If you're willing to not go down this road, which we believe is a loser, let's work together to try to define a way to protect your security without becoming a nuclear power." And we have to go back to the Indians and say, "Let's find a way to protect your security and honor the greatness of your democracy without becoming a nuclear power. This is a bad thing, but let's minimize this. This is not a good thing for the world. The Russians and the Americans, we're trying to lower our nuclear arsenals. We're trying to make this problem go away for the world. And we do not need to just have a whole lot of other people with smaller nuclear arsenals on the assumption that they'll never be used. You can't do that." <stop>