A goal of neuroscience is to obtain a causal model of the nervous system. The recently reported whole-brain fly connectome specifies the synaptic paths by which neurons can affect each other, but not how strongly they do affect each other in vivo. To overcome this limitation, we introduce a combined experimental and statistical strategy for efficiently learning a causal model of the fly brain, which we refer to as the ‘effectome’. Specifically, we propose an estimator for a linear dynamical model of the fly brain that uses stochastic optogenetic perturbation data to estimate causal effects and the connectome as a prior to greatly improve estimation efficiency. We validate our estimator in connectome-based linear simulations and show that it recovers a linear approximation to the nonlinear dynamics of more biophysically realistic simulations. We then analyse the connectome to propose circuits that dominate the dynamics of the fly nervous system. We discover that the dominant circuits involve only relatively small populations of neurons—thus, neuron-level imaging, stimulation and identification are feasible. This approach also re-discovers known circuits and generates testable hypotheses about their dynamics. Overall, we provide evidence that fly whole-brain dynamics are generated by a large collection of small circuits that operate largely independently of each other. This implies that a causal model of a brain can be feasibly obtained in the fly.

Natural disasters trigger complex chains of events within human societies. Immediate deaths and damage are directly observed after a disaster and are widely studied, but delayed downstream outcomes, indirectly caused by the disaster, are difficult to trace back to the initial event. Tropical cyclones (TCs)—that is, hurricanes and tropical storms—are widespread globally and have lasting economic impacts, but their full health impact remains unknown. Here we conduct a large-scale evaluation of long-term effects of TCs on human mortality in the contiguous United States (CONUS) for all TCs between 1930 and 2015. We observe a robust increase in excess mortality that persists for 15 years after each geophysical event. We estimate that the average TC generates 7,000–11,000 excess deaths, exceeding the average of 24 immediate deaths reported in government statistics. Tracking the effects of 501 historical storms, we compute that the TC climate of CONUS imposes an undocumented mortality burden that explains a substantial fraction of the higher mortality rates along the Atlantic coast and is equal to roughly 3.2–5.1% of all deaths. These findings suggest that the TC climate, previously thought to be unimportant for broader public health outcomes, is a meaningful underlying driver for the distribution of mortality risk in CONUS, especially among infants (less than 1 year of age), people 1–44 years of age, and the Black population. Understanding why TCs induce this excess mortality is likely to yield substantial health benefits.

Down syndrome predisposes individuals to haematological abnormalities, such as increased number of erythrocytes and leukaemia in a process that is initiated before birth and is not entirely understood. Here, to understand dysregulated haematopoiesis in Down syndrome, we integrated single-cell transcriptomics of over 1.1 million cells with chromatin accessibility and spatial transcriptomics datasets using human fetal liver and bone marrow samples from 3 fetuses with disomy and 15 fetuses with trisomy. We found that differences in gene expression in Down syndrome were dependent on both cell type and environment. Furthermore, we found multiple lines of evidence that haematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) in Down syndrome are ‘primed’ to differentiate. We subsequently established a Down syndrome-specific map linking non-coding elements to genes in disomic and trisomic HSCs using 10X multiome data. By integrating this map with genetic variants associated with blood cell counts, we discovered that trisomy restructured regulatory interactions to dysregulate enhancer activity and gene expression critical to erythroid lineage differentiation. Furthermore, as mutations in Down syndrome display a signature of oxidative stress, we validated both increased mitochondrial mass and oxidative stress in Down syndrome, and observed that these mutations preferentially fell into regulatory regions of expressed genes in HSCs. Together, our single-cell, multi-omic resource provides a high-resolution molecular map of fetal haematopoiesis in Down syndrome and indicates significant regulatory restructuring giving rise to co-occurring haematological conditions.

Metallurgical production traditionally involves three steps: extracting metals from ores, mixing them into alloys by liquid processing and thermomechanical processing to achieve the desired microstructures. This sequential approach, practised since the Bronze Age, reaches its limit today because of the urgent demand for a sustainable economy: almost 10% of all greenhouse gas emissions are because of the use of fossil reductants and high-temperature metallurgical processing. Here we present a H2-based redox synthesis and compaction approach that reforms traditional alloy-making by merging metal extraction, alloying and thermomechanical processing into one single solid-state operation. We propose a thermodynamically informed guideline and a general kinetic conception to dissolve the classical boundaries between extractive and physical metallurgy, unlocking tremendous sustainable bulk alloy design opportunities. We exemplify this approach for the case of Fe–Ni invar bulk alloys, one of the most appealing ferrous materials but the dirtiest to produce: invar shows uniquely low thermal expansion, enabling key applications spanning from precision instruments to cryogenic components. Yet, it is notoriously eco-unfriendly, with Ni causing more than 10 times higher CO2 emission than Fe per kilogram production, qualifying this alloy class as a perfect demonstrator case. Our sustainable method turns oxides directly into green alloys in bulk forms, with application-worthy properties, all obtained at temperatures far below the bulk melting point, while maintaining a zero CO2 footprint.

Although a ubiquitous natural phenomenon, the onset and subsequent process of surface wave breaking are not fully understood. Breaking affects how steep waves become and drives air–sea exchanges. Most seminal and state-of-the-art research on breaking is underpinned by the assumption of two-dimensionality, although ocean waves are three dimensional. We present experimental results that assess how three-dimensionality affects breaking, without putting limits on the direction of travel of the waves. We show that the breaking-onset steepness of the most directionally spread case is double that of its unidirectional counterpart. We identify three breaking regimes. As directional spreading increases, horizontally overturning ‘travelling-wave breaking’ (I), which forms the basis of two-dimensional breaking, is replaced by vertically jetting ‘standing-wave breaking’ (II). In between, ‘travelling-standing-wave breaking’ (III) is characterized by the formation of vertical jets along a fast-moving crest. The mechanisms in each regime determine how breaking limits steepness and affects subsequent air–sea exchanges. Unlike in two dimensions, three-dimensional wave-breaking onset does not limit how steep waves may become, and we produce directionally spread waves 80% steeper than at breaking onset and four times steeper than equivalent two-dimensional waves at their breaking onset. Our observations challenge the validity of state-of-the-art methods used to calculate energy dissipation and to design offshore structures in highly directionally spread seas.